CHAPTER I

On the Superiority of Rudra Over Viṣṇu

སྐལ་བྱིན་

भवता कथितं सूत महदारख्यानुक्तमम् ।

कृष्णाय चरितं दिख्यं सर्वपातकनाशम् ॥ १ ॥

सन्देडोउ महाभाग वासुदेवकधानके ।

जातवे नः प्रोच्यमाने विस्तरणे महामते ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: “The great legendary story, the life of Śrī Krṣṇa, supremely divine, destructive of all sins, has been narrated by you, O Sūta! But, O Blessed One! You, though highly intelligent, have dwelt on it not at great length; hence many doubts are cropping in our minds.

चने गत्वा तपस्तवं वासुदेवेन दुष्कम् ।

विष्णोश्वातरेण शिवत्यागाधनं कृतम् ॥ ३ ॥

वरप्रदानं देया च पार्वत्य यकृतं पुरः ।

जनमान्तुङ्ग पूर्णायाः श्रीद्योआं अंशपूर्वता ॥ 4 ॥

ईंध्रोगपि कृष्णोन कुतस्ती सम्पूर्वजतौ ।

न्यन्ता वा किमसत्यस्य तद्वे संगरो मम ॥ 5 ॥

A very difficult tapasyā was performed by Vāsudeva, part incarnate of Viṣṇu, who had to go to forest to worship Śiva. Next, it has been known that the Devi Pārvati, the part incarnate of the Great Mother, the Mother of the universe, the Supreme, and Perfect offered boons to Śri Krṣṇa. How did it then come to pass that Śri Krṣṇa, being himself the God, had to worship Pārvati and Mahādeva? Is it that Śri Krṣṇa was inferior to Mahādeva and Pārvati? This is our doubt."

सूत उवाच

श्यूघ्रं कारणं तत्र मया व्यास श्रुतं च चत् ।

प्रवंतीम महाभागाः कथां कृष्णगुणानिताम् ॥ ६ ॥

ब्रुतान्तं व्यासतः श्रुत्वा वैरादीमुताजस्त्वा ।

पुनः पप्रच्छ मेधावी सन्देहं परमं गतः ॥ ७ ॥

Sūta spoke: “Hear then, the reasons, O noble Rīsi! that I heard from Vyāsa; I will now sing before you those meritorious deeds of Śrī Krṣṇa.” The son of Pariksit, the intelligent Janamejaya had also the same doubts that you now have, when he heard the story before from Vyāsa; and he asked the same questions that you now ask.

जनमेव उवाच

सप्यक्सत्यवतीसूने आुतं परमकारणम् ।

तथापि मनसो वृत्ति: संशयं न विमुईति ॥ 8 ॥

कृष्णोनाराधितः शम्भुस्तपतत्वात्रिदाकाणम् ।

विसयोउं मद्राभाग देवदेवेन विष्णुना ॥ 9 ॥

Janamejaya said: “O son of Satyavatī! I have heard from you much about the Supreme Goddess, the Highest Cause; still the doubts are not leaving me. O Fortunate One! Kṛṣṇa the Deva of the Devas, the Viṣṇu incarnate, worshipped Sambhu and had to perform dire penances; this is my great wonder!

यः सर्वात्मासि सर्वैश: सर्वसिद्धप्रद: प्रशु: ।

स कर्व कृताव्योरे तप: प्राकृतबद्धरि: ॥ 10 ॥

He is the soul of all the Jivas, the One Ruler and Lord of this world and He is able to confer all

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

the Siddhis; how is it, then, that the Lord Hari had to perform very difficult asceticism like an ordinary mortal.

जनकर्तूं क्षम: कृष्णस्वधा पालयितुं क्षम: ।

संडुर्गायि कस्माल दारुणं तप आवर्त् ॥ १ १ ॥

He who is able to create this universe, moving and un-moving, He who is able to preserve and destroy it, why did He practise such a terrible penance."

व्यास उवाच

सत्यमुक्ते त्वया राजनासुरेदो जनादीनः ।

शमः सर्वेषु कार्येषु देवानां दैत्यसूदनः ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: “True it has been said by you that Vāsudeva, the Janārdana, is the destroyer of the Daityas and He is able to create and preserve the Devas and do all other acts for them.

तथापि मानुवं देह्माश्रभ: परमेश्वः ।

कृतवान्मनुषान्यावल्याणीप्रस्मापाश्रितान् ॥ 13 ॥

But the Great Lord assumed a human body; therefore he had to perform his duties like a man and observe the Varna and Śārama Dharmas pertaining to human beings.

युद्धानां पूर्नं चैव गुरूपादाभिवन्दनम् ।

ब्राह्माणां तथा सेवा देवतातारधनं तथा ॥ 14 ॥

गोके शोकाधिपोग्रह हर्ष हंस्यमुवर्ति: ।

दैनं नानप्रवादाश्र ऋषीष कामोपसेवनम् ॥ 15 ॥

Respecting the elderly persons, worshipping the spiritual teachers, doing service to the Brāhmanas, adoring and propitiating the Devas, feeling sorrow at times of sorrow, feeling pleasure at times of happiness, feeling dejection or expressing censure or scandal, or having sexual intercourse with women, in other words, to feel lust, anger, greediness and other passions when their proper time arises.

कामः क्रोधस्तथा लोधः काले काले भवन्ति है ।

तथा गृणमये देहे निर्णणत्वं कर्ध भवेत् ॥ १ ६ ॥

All these are natural to all human beings; how can, then, Śri Kṛṣṇa though intrinsically of pure qualities, become Nirguṇa (devoid of human

qualities) when he assumed a human body which is Saguna, i.e., with qualities.

सीब्तीशपजाइघातथा ब्राह्मणशपजात् ।

निधनं याद्वानां तु कृष्णदेहस्म योचनम् ॥ 17 ॥

हरणं तुरुन्तं तद्धान्त्वनीनां नराधिय ।

अजुन्स्यास्वमोक्षे च कर्तीबाव्त तस्करेषु च ॥ 18 ॥

अज्ञलं हरणे गेहातन्यधूनानिकृद्धोः ।

एवं भानुपदेशे3स्मिनानुपं खतु चेहितम् ॥ 19 ॥

O Ruler of men! The extinction of the Yādava race by the curse of Gāndhāri, the daughter of Subala, and the curse of a Brāhmin, Krṣna's leaving his human coil, the stealing away of his wives, the robbing of their wealth on the way by the dacoits of the Ābhīra tribe, Ajuna's becoming powerless to hurl any weapons on those dacoits, Krṣna's not knowing anything about the stealing away of Pradyumna and Aniruddha from his Dvārakā palace, these all correspond verily to exertions and failings appropriate to human bodies.

विष्णोरंगशतारोरंस्मातायमानुनेलथा ।

अंगजे वासुदेवेउत्र किं चित्र शिवसेवने ॥ २० ॥

स हि सर्वेशुते देयो विष्णोपरि च कारणम् ।

सुयुतस्थाननाथ: स विष्णुना च प्रयुक्ति: ॥ 21 ॥

Again the Rsi Nārāyaṇa is the part incarnate of Viṣṇu, and Vāsudeva is the part incarnate of the Rsi Nārāyaṇa; hence what wonder is there, if Vāsudeva be seen to adore and propitiate Śiva as the God of gods; and He is the Lord of all the causal bodies that exist in the state of Sushpti (deep sleep). In this respect, Śiva is the creator of Viṣṇu and Viṣṇu worships Him in this light.

तदोर्भपूता कृष्णाइास्नैः कर्ण न स पुरस्ते ।

अकातो भगवान्बहाय्याकार: स्याद्धि: स्वयम् ॥ 22 ॥

मकातो भगवानुश्रीउपधर्माता मेहक्षी ।

Rāma, Krṣna and others are all part incarnations of Viṣṇu; so there is no wonder if they worship Śiva. The letter A is Bhagavān Brahma; the letter “U” is Bhagavān Hari; the letter “M” is Bhagavān Rudra and the half letter m is Maheśvarī, the Supreme Mother of the universe.

Book V Chapter I

उत्तरोतरभावेनाप्युतमचं स्मृतं बुद्धे: ॥ 23 ॥

उतः सर्वेषु शाखेशु देथी वसंतांनमा स्मृता ।

अधमात्रा स्थित तिनया यानुच्चायां विशेषतः ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore, consider Viṣnu superiter to Brahmā; they again consider Rudra superior to Viṣnu and Maheśvari (Turiya State) again superior to Rudra. The speciality of the half letter is that it can never be uttered; it is the symbol of the Eternal Devi. In all, therefore, the superiority of the Devi is established.

विष्योपधिको रूदी विष्युस्ते बहणोर्धिकः।

तस्मार संशयः कार्यः कृष्णेन शिवपूजने ॥ 25 ॥

इच्छया बहणो वक्यात्रद्वाराथयुद्धभी ।

Visnu is superior to Brahmā; Rudra is superior to Visnu. Therefore no doubt can arise in Krṣna's worshipping Śiva. It is through the will of Śiva that a second Rudra originated from the forehead of Brahmā to offer boons (i.e., to Brahmā).

मूलहन्धस्यांभृतो महनामा ब्रितीयकः ॥ 26 ॥

सोर्पि पूर्णोर्सित सर्वेभी मूलहन्य का कथा ।

देवीतच्चस्य साझिश्यानुतमचं स्मृतं शिवे ॥ 27 ॥

This second Rudra is venerable and entitled to all worship; what to speak of the First Rudra? O King! It is through the proximity of the Devi that the importance and superiority of Śiva is thus established.

अवतारा हरेरेखं प्रभवन्ति चुंगे युगे ।

योगमायाप्रभावेण नात्र कार्य विचारणा ॥ 28 ॥

Thus the incarnations of Hari arise in yugas after yugas through the intervention of the Yoga Māyā; so there is no discussion on this point.

या नेरपक्षपरिसडृतनेन सम्यविश्वं

सुज्ज्वाति हन्त निगुहभावा ।

सैया कृतोत सततं ईहिषण्यूतोग-

त्रानावतारकलने धरिभ्यमानान् ॥ 29 ॥

Why to Acyuta alone, to Brahmā and Śiva also She gives troubles for getting involved into incarnations. She the Yoga Māyā who is indirectly, with the twinkings of Her eyes, creating, preserving and destroying this universe.

सूतीगृहाद्वजनमध्यनया नियुक्ते

संगीतितश्व भवने यपुणालराः ।

संप्रापितश मधुर्ग विनिवीतितश

श्रीहारकाप्रणयने ननुं भीतिधतः ॥ 30 ॥

It is the Yoga Māyā that caused Krṣṇa to be transferred from his lying-in-chamber to the village Vraja and then protected him in the house of the cowherd Nanda; afterwards took him to Mathurā for the destruction of Kaṇisa, whence he was again out of Jarāsandha's fear to the city of Dvārkā.

निर्माय षोडगसहस्णताधिकासता

नार्योघ समतताः स्वकलासमुचाः ।

तासां विलासवर्गगं तु विधाय कामं

दासीकृती हि भगवाननयापनन्तः ॥ 31 ॥

It is She that created from Her Ownself the eight Naikās (the leading mistresses) and also sixteen thousand and fifty women for the pleasure and enjoyment of Krṣna Bhagavān, the incarnation of Ananta (Viṣṇu Bhagavān); thus Krṣna Bhagavān was made completely subservient to them just like a perfect slave.

एकासिप बन्यनिवधी युवती समर्था

पुंसो यथा सुद्वलोहमयं तु दाम ।

किं नाम घोडागसहस्रशताध्रकाश

तं स्वीकृतं शुकामिवातिविन्तन्यन्ति ॥ 32 ॥

साजाजितीक्षणतने मुदान्यतेन प्राप्त

सुरैप्रवर्न हरिणा तत्वानीम् ।

कृत्वा भूयं भयवता विह्नासल्णागीश:

प्रियासदनभूषणतां य आप ॥ 33 ॥

When a young woman, though she is alone, can bind a man down by the network of Māyā, like a strong iron chain, what wonder is there that the sixteen thousand and fifty women would make Krṣṇa play in their hands like a Śuka bird and make him an instrument to serve any purpose that they liked. Śrī Krṣṇa got himself so much under the control of Satyabhāmā that He went gladly under her commands to Indra's heavens to get the Pārijāta flowers. There he had to fight with Indra

and subsequently stole away the Pārijāta tree and gave it to Satyabhāmā as a very valuable ornament to be kept in her room.

यो भीमर्ग है हृतवाक्षिरुपालकादीझुला

विधि निविलतधर्मकृती विधित्युः ।

जग्रह तां निजबलेन च धर्मपन्तीं

कोउसी विधि: परकललहृती विज्ञाना: ॥ 34 ॥

Behold! The same Kṛṣṇa, by His own prowess, defeated Śiśupāla and others for the preservation of religion and then stole away Rukminī, the daughter of Bhima and afterwards married her as his legal wife; where is the rule, then, observed that it is a sin to take away another's wife?

अहंकारशः प्राणी करोति च रुभाणुषम् ।

विमूढो महाङ्गलेन तत्कृतेनासिपतिना ॥ 3 5 ॥

Thus all embodied beings get themselves subdued by Aharinkāra and do acts, good or bad, confounded and deluded by the network of Moha that always drags one down below.

अहंकाराद्धि संजातिमदं स्थावरजघूम् ।

मृत्नाद्धिरहादीनानुप्राप्तुकृतिसभ्यन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

अहक्रापरिस्तची यदा भवति पधजः ।

तदा विमुक्तो भवति नोचेत्सोराकर्मकृत् ॥ 37 ॥

From the Mūlā Prakṛti are born Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Hara and from the Tāmasik Ahanikāra of Prakṛti is created this whole cosmos, moving and non-moving. The lotus-born Brahmā becomes free when he is free from Ahanikāra; otherwise He becomes engaged in this world affairs.

तनुक्तनु विमुक्ती हि बढ़मतद्धगतां गतः ।

न नारी न धर्न गेहं न पुत्रा न सहोदरा: ॥ 38 ॥

बन्थन प्राणिनां राजनहंकारसनु बन्यकः ।

अर्ह कर्ता मया चेरे कृते कार्यं बलैरासः ॥ 39 ॥

When freed from this Ahanrikāra, all the Jivas become free; and their houses, wealth, wives, sons and brothers are quite powerless to tie them down; but when bound by Ahanrikāra, the Jivas come under their control.

कर्णियामि करोयेवं स्वयं कंपतालि प्राणभूत ।

कारणेन विना कार्य न सम्भवति कर्हिंघित् ॥ 40 ॥

O king! This Aharikāra is the cause of bondage to all the beings; “I am the doer, this work is done by my power; or this I will do myself” thinking thus, the embodied beings bring themselves under this bondage.

मथा न दृषयते जातो भूर्यिडेन विना घटः ।

विषयु: पालातिवा विश्रयराहंकारसमन्ति: ॥ 4 1 ॥

An earthen pot cannot be made without earth; no effects can be visible without a cause; consequently Viṣnu is preserving this universe, because of this Ahanṅkāra (imposed on him Prakṛti).

अन्यथा सर्वदा चिन्तांबुधी मानः कर्वं भवेत् ।

अहंकारविमुक्तसु यदा भवति मानवः॥ 42 ॥

The human beings are always drowned in their cares and anxieties simply because they are bound by this Aharīnkāra; when they become free from this Aharīnkāra, their cares and anxieties at once vanish.

अवतारप्रावहैषु कर्थ मज्जेच्छुभाशयः ।

मोहमूलमहंकारः संभारतस्तस्युद्धः ॥ 4 3 ॥ १

अहंकाराविद्वीनानां न मोहो न च संमृति: ।

विविधः पुरुषः प्रोक्तः साचिक्यो राजसस्तथा ॥ 4 4 ॥

तामसन्तु महात्राज ब्रहाविष्युगिशावितु ।

विविध्यास्त्रि राजेन्द्र काजेशादितु सर्वदा ॥ 4 5 ॥

Moha (delusion) comes out of Ahrikākāra; world and the enjoyments thereof come out of Moha; otherwise how can it be accounted for, that Hari and others, the mine of all good and auspiciousness, take their several incarnations in various wombs? Neither Moha nor this world comes to those that are bereft of Ahrikāra. Men are of three kinds, Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik; O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva are sprung respectively from the Rājasik, Sāttvik, and Tāmasik Ahankāras,

अहूक्रारः सदा प्रोक्तो युनिभिस्तत्वदर्शिधि: ।

अहूक्रारण तेनैव बढ़ा एते न संशयः ॥ 46 ॥

मायाविमोहिता मन्तः प्रवद्धिन मनीषिणः ।

क्रोति स्वेच्छया विष्णुव्रताननेकः ॥ 47 ॥

Book V Chapter II

मन्तोप्रि दुःखगहने गर्भवासेस्तिसढ़हे ।

न क्लोति माति विद्यान्कयं कुर्मास चक्रभूत् ॥ 48 ॥

In these three, the three Aharinkāras are always to be found, so the Munis, that have realised the Real Essence, declare. They are all bound by this Aharinkāra; there is no doubt in this. The Paṇdits of dull intellect, and deluded by Māyā declare that Viṣṇu takes various incarnations out of his own free will; for when it is seen that men of even intellect do not entertain any desire to enter into the wombs, painful and terrible; how will Viṣṇu, then, the Holder of the discus, like to come into this womb!

कीसत्यादेवकामर्षे लिहुपालसमाकुले ।

स्वेच्छया प्रवर्त्यद्धा गतो हि मभ्युसून: ॥ 49 ॥

वैकुण्ठसदर्तं व्यक्ता भर्षायो सुखं नु किम ।

चिताकोटिमसूथाने दुःखदे विषयमिति ॥ 50 ॥

तपस्त्वा क्रनूकृता दत्वा दानान्यनेकशः ।

न वाईति यातो लोका नभवासं सुखुःखदम् ॥ 51 ॥

The slayer of Madhu, the Vaiṣṇavas say, entered all at once into the wombs of Kausálya and Devakī, full of faeces and other dirty things, of His own free will. But you must think out what happiness can Madhusūdana, quitting his Vaikuntha Heavens, attain in this womb, full of so many troubles, and where arise, like poisons, hundreds of cares and thoughts to torment an

individual! Especially when it is seen that human beings perform asceticism, sacrifice Yajñas and do various charities, that they would avoid thus entering in wombs, which is very painful and terrible.

स कर्ष भगाविष्णु: स्ववगीडज्ञनिदानः ।

गर्भवासरुचिर्याद्वैरल्वगता यदि १५२ ॥

जानीति त्वं महाराज योगमायावरो जगत् ।

बह्ञादिस्तंवपर्यन्ते देवमानुषितियम् ॥ ५३ ॥

मायातन्मीतिबब्धा ये बह्वाहिष्युतरयः ।

भ्यन्ति बन्धमायाति लीलाया घोर्णनाभ्यत् ॥ ५४ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभाग्याते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्ने

प्रभोत्रयाय: 11 1 11

How can Bhagavān Viṣṇu be called independent? If so, He would never have yielded to enter into various wombs. Therefore, O king! Know this that this whole universe is under the control of Yoga Māyā; the Devas, men, birds, what more everything from Brahmā down to a blade of grass are all under the control of Yoga Māyā. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara all are bound by the rope of Her Māyā. So they roam easily by Her Māyā from womb to womb like a spider.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Fifth Book on the superiority of Rudra over Viṣṇu in the Mahā Purānam of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa, consisting of 18,000 verses.

Book V Chapter II

CHAPTER II

On the Birth of the Dānava Mahiṣa

यात्र सच्च

योगेश्वरा: प्रभावोउरं कथितश्रातिविस्तरात् ।

ब्रृहि तचार्वितं स्वामिच्छ्योतुं कौतूहलं मम ॥ १ ॥

महादेवीप्रभावं वे श्रोतुं को नाभिवांशति ।

यो ज्ञानाति जगत्मखं तदुत्पयंचे चराचर्म ॥ 2 ॥

The king said: “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the Mahā Māyā Yogēsvari; now describe Her Life and Character; I am very eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and non-moving, has been created by Maheśvarī; who is there that desires not to hear Her Glory!”

ध्यास उवाच

श्रुणु राजन्यवश्यामि विस्तरेण गहामते ।

श्रद्धायानय शानात्य न ब्यासल तु मन्दधीः ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa spoke: “O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe in detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded?

पुरा युद्धमभूद्वारे देवदानवसेनयो: ।

पृथिव्यां पृथिव्याणल महिषाण्ये महीर्णते ॥ 4 ॥

In days of yore, a terrible battle ensued between

Devas and Dānava forces on this earth when Mahisāśura was the Ruler of this world.

महिषो नाम राजेन्द्र चकार तप उत्तमम् ।

गत्वा हेमिपती चोर्धे देवविस्यकाकतम् ॥ 5 ॥

O king! Mahisāśura went to the mountain of Suneru and performed a very severe and excellent tapasyā, wonderful even to the gods.

वर्षाणामयुतं पूर्ण चित्यनन्द्रिदे देखताम् ।

तस्य तुही महाराज बझा लोकपितामहः ॥ 6 ॥

O king! Meditating on his Iṣta Devatā (the deity for his worship) in his heart, elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahmā the Grandfather of all the Lokas, was pleased with him.

तत्रागत्याब्वीढ़ावं हंसाक्वश्रतुर्भुंखः ।

वं वरय धर्मानन्दादिम तव वांछ्ठनम् ॥ 7 ॥

The fourfaced Brahmā, arrived there on his vehicle, the swan, and asked Mahisāsura “O One of virtuous soul! Ask from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.”

महिष उवाच

आमत्वं देवेदेव वाज्छाभि द्रुहिण प्रभो ।

यथा मृत्युभयं न स्वात्तथा कुक चितात् ॥ 8 ॥

Mahiṣa said: “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become immortal! therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do for me so that I have no fear of death.”

बह्योवाच

उत्पनस्य ध्रुवं मृत्युईं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

सर्वेधा मणीतचती सर्वेधां प्राणिजां किल ॥ 9 ॥

नाश: कालेन सर्वेधां प्राणिजां द्विपुंगव ।

महामहीधराणां च समुद्राणां च सर्वेधां ॥ 10 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Mahīsa! Birth must be followed by death, and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature. Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and when one dies, one will be born. O Lord of Dānavas! What more to say than this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings will die when time will come.

एकं स्थानं परित्यज मणयस्य महीपते ।

प्रबृहि तं वरं साधो यसे मनसि वर्ते ॥ १ १ ॥

O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; therefore ask any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to you."

महिष्य उवाच

न देवामानुबाहैत्यामरणे मे पितामह ।

पुरुषाच च मे मृत्युर्षीया मां का हीन्यति ॥ १२ ॥

तसामाने मरणं नूनं कामियाः कुरु पयज ।

अवला हन मां केनुं कथं शक्ता भविष्यति ॥ 13 ॥

Mahisa said: “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva, Dānava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. There is none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O Lotus-eyed! Let women be the cause of my death; how can women slay me! They are too weak to kill me!”

ब्रह्मोवाच

यदा कदापि दैलेन्द्र नायांतसे मरणं धुवम् ।

न नरेषो महाभाग मृतिले महिषासुर ॥ 14 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Lord of the Dānavas! Your death will certainly occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No man will be able to cause your death.”

व्यास उवाच

एवं द्रत्वा वरं तत्मी ययौ बह्जा निजालयम् ।

सोउपि दैत्यवरः प्राप्त निजं स्वानं मुतुवित्व: ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Thus granting him the boon, Brahmā went to his own abode; the lord of the Dānavas, too, returned to his place, very glad.”

राजोबाच

महिषः कस्य युप्रोउसी कर्वे जातो महावत्नी ।

कक्षे न माहिषं रूप प्राप्तं तेन महात्मना ॥ १ ६ ॥

The king said: “O Bhagavān! Whose son was this powerful Mahisāsura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a body of a buffalo?”

Book V Chapter II

यास उवाच

दनोः पूत्री महाराज विद्यातों हिंतिमपड़ले ।

रामश्रीव कर्मभश्र द्वावास्तां दानवोतमौ ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two sons of Danu; these two Dānavas were far famed in this world for their pre-eminence.”

तावपूजी महाराज पूजार्थे तेनपुस्तपः ।

बदर्भर्पिणाण-कामा पुर्णे पछाने जले ॥ 18 ॥

“O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of issues, they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pañca Nada) and there performed severe asceticism for long years.”

करामस्तु जले मान्यछाकार परमं तपः ।

यूक्षं रसावटं प्रायः रम्भोउनिम्मेववत् ॥ 19 ॥

पश्रामिनासधानासक्तः स रंभसून यदापवत् ।

जात्वा शर्षीपतिडुःखमुच्यो दानवो प्रति ॥ 20 ॥

Karamba got himself submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasyā; while the other, Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree (haunted by Yakṣinīs) and there began to worship Fire. Rambha remained, engaged in worshipping the Five Fires; knowing this, Indra, the Lord of Saṃ, was pained and hurried thither, being very anxious.

नाचा पड़नंदे तन ग्राहरूपं चकार है ।

वासवस्तु कारभं ते तदा जगाद पावयेः ॥ 21 ॥

Going to Pañcha Nada, Indra assumed the form of a crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked Karambha and killed him.

निजधान च तं तुर्दं कारभं वूरमुद्नः ।

भातरं निरहतं शूला रम्भः कोपं परं नातः ॥ 22 ॥

स्वर्गीर्ष पावके होतुषेच्छच्छता केगे ।

केशणशे गृतीलास२५शु वामेन क्रोधसंयुतः ॥ 23 ॥

दक्षिणेन कर्णगर्भ गृहीला खद्वागुन्तामम् ।

छिन्ति शीर्ष तावाद्विहिना प्रतिविधितः ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got very much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held

the hair of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus:

उक्तछु दैत्य मुर्खोंजीस स्वर्गीशं उतुचिष्छसि ।

आतमह्यापतिछुःसाधाय कर्थं ले कर्तुमुहतः ॥ 25 ॥

वरं वरथ भई ते यत्मे मनसि वर्तते ।

मा विषयस मुनेताथ किं ते कार्य भविष्यति ॥ 26 ॥

"You are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; killing one's own self is a great sin; and there is no means of deliverance from this sin. Why are you then ready to execute it?" Do not seek your death now; what end will that serve you? Rather ask boons from me; thus you will get your welfare."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं रमः पावकस्य सुभाषितम् ।

ततो3बबीडुचो रामस्थलवा केशकलापकम् ॥ 27 ॥

यदि तुढो3स देहेगा देहेि मे वारिड्ठतं वरम् ।

त्रैलोक्यविजयी पुः: स्यातः परवलातः ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire, Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said: “O Lord of the Devas! If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born unto me, who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will conquer the three worlds.”

अजेब: सर्वथा स्याहेद्वतनयमानविः ।

कामस्पी महावीर्वः सर्वलोकामिवस्ति: ॥ 29 ॥

"And that son be invincible in every way is the Devas, Dānavas and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, and respected by all."

पावकस्तं तंत्याहूष पविष्यति तवैप्रिस्तम् ।

पुत्रस्तव महाभाग मरणाहिमयानुना ॥ 30 ॥

Fire said: “O highly Fortunate! You will get your son, as you desire; therefore desist now from your attempt of suicide.”

यस्यां चित्तं तु रम्पा त्वं प्रमदानं कार्यस्य।

तस्यां पुत्रो महाभाग विध्वयित् वताधिकः ॥ 31 ॥

O highly fortunate Rambha! With any female

of whichever species, you will co-habit, you will get a son, more powerful than you; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो वहितां रभ्यो वचनं चितरऊनम् ।

भुत्वा प्रणाय्य प्रययी वहितं ते द्रावलोभमः ॥ 32 ॥

यक्षे: परिवृतं स्थानं परमाणिं शिव्यान्यितम् ।

सूद्वा चडेते तदा भावं महिष्यां द्रावलोभमः ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Dānavas, went, surrounded by Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with picturesque sceneries; when one lovely she-buffalo, who was very maddened with passion, fell to the sight of Rambha.

मताचां रूपणुर्णां विहायान्यां च योषितम् ।

सा समागच्छ तसा कामवन्ती मुद्रान्ति ॥ 34 ॥

रामो5पि यानं चके भवित्यगुणिति: ।

सा तुु भर्षितां जाता महीधी तस्य वीयतेः ॥ 35 ॥

And he desired to have sexual intercourse with her, in preference to other women. The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his purpose and Rambha had sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were by the destiny. The she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile.

तां गृहीतावंथ पालातं प्रविश्य मनोह्मम् ।

महिषेध्यन्त्र तां रक्षिन्याममुन्ता किल ३ ३ ६ ॥

The Dānava, too, carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Pātāla (the lower regions) for her protection.

क्रताधिन्यिष्ठान्य कामान्तैस्तामुपाद्वल ।

स्वयमान्य तं हेतुं दानवः समुपाद्वत् ॥ 37 ॥

On one occasion, another buffalo got excited and wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Dānava was also ready to kill him.

स्वरक्षां समान्यल महिंं समताड्यत ।

सोर्पि नं तिज्ञानायुं शुभाप्यां कामाभेहितः ॥ 38 ॥

The Dānava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for the safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with his horns.

ताडितस्तेन तीक्षणान्यां शुभाण्यां हृदये भुणम् ।

भूमौ प्यात ततसा ममार च विमूर्हितः ॥ 39 ॥

The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that Rambha fell down senseless all of a sudden and finally died.

मुते भर्तीर सा दीना भयातां विद्युत भुणम् ।

सा वेगातं वटं गाय्य व्यक्षाणों शरणत ॥ 40 ॥

Seeing her husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, with terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under the Yakṣas.

पृढ़तस्तु गतस्तत्र महिषः कामपीडितः ।

कामयानस्तु तां कामी बलवीर्यमोद्धतः ॥ 41 ॥

But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with vigour, ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her.

रुदती सा भुशं दीना दृषा यद्येष्यातृना ।

धायानं च तं वीक्ष्य यक्षास्तुं समाययुः ॥ 42 ॥

On seeing the miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, and seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yakṣas assembled to protect her.

युब्द्रं समभवब्दोरं यक्षाणां च ह्वायरिण ।

त्रोग ताडितस्तूर्णी पचात धरणितले ॥43 ॥

मृतं रभं समानीय यक्षान्ते परभं विद्यम् ।

चितायां तोयामामुस्तस्य देहस्यु शुक्रदे ॥44 ॥

A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the Yakṣas, when the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and died. Rambha was very much liked by the Yakṣas; so they cremated his dead body for its purification.

महिली सा पति हृद्धा चितायां रोपित तदा ।

प्रवेषु सा मर्ति चक्रे पतिना सह पावकम् ॥ 45 ॥

The she-buffalo, seeing her husband laid in the funeral pyre, expressed her desire to enter also into that fire.

वाय्योपार्थि यक्षेः सा प्रविशेष शुताशनम् ।

ज्ञात्मानालुकले साधी पतिमदाय वतलभगम् ॥ 46 ॥

The Yakṣas resisted; but that chaste wife quickly entered the pyre along with her husband.

Book V Chapter III

महिष्यनु चितामध्यात्समुन्त्रधौ महावलः ।

रभोयव्यविद्युः कृत्वा नि:सूत पुरवस्तलः ॥ 47 ॥

When the she-buffalo died, the powerful Mahisa rose from his mother's womb from the midst of the funeral pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in another form out of his affection towards his son.

रक्रीकीजोपयसी जातो महिषोपि महावलः ।

अधिधिस्त्रु राज्येउसी ह्वारिसुरोतमे: ॥ 4 8 ॥

Rambha was known as Raktabīja after he had changed his form. His son was thus born as a very powerful Dānava and became famous by the name of Mahisa.

एवं स महिषो जातो रक्तबीजश्छ खीयंवान् ।

अवध्यस्तु सुरैर्दैल्मानवैश्व रुणेतम ॥ ४९ ॥

The chief Dānavas installed Mahisa on the

throne. O king! The very powerful Raktabīja, the Dānava Mahisa, thus took their births and became invincible of the Devas, Dānavas and human beings.

इत्येतत्क्रियां राजझ्म तत्थ महात्मतः ।

वरप्रदानं च तथा प्रोक्ते सर्व सविस्तम् ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणी पद्धमस्कन्धे

महिषासुरो्य्पतिनीम द्वितीयंडधायः ॥ 2 ॥ 11

O king! I have now described to you the birth of the high-souled Dānava Mahiṣa and his getting the boon, all in detail.

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of Mahiṣa Dānavā in the Devi Bhāgavatam of the Mahāpurāṇaṃ composed of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter III

CHAPTER III

On the Daitya Armies Getting Ready

यास उवाच

एवं स महिषो नाम दानवो वर्दर्पितः ।

प्राय एकं उनसर्व वं जोके महाबलः ॥ १ ॥

पृथिवी पालवामास सागरानां भूजार्जिताम् ।

एकच्छत्रा निरारतंका वैरिवर्गविवर्जिताम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: “The very powerful Asura Mahisa, puffed up with vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought the whole world under his control! He, being of paramount power, began to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own arms, over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other rival to the king nor any cause of the slightest fear.

सेनानीश्रिक्षतस्य महावीर्णं मदोकटः ।

भान्यक्षन्धता ताभः सेनाशुतममावृतः ॥ 3 ॥

His Commander-in-Chief was then the very powerful Cikṣura, maddened with pride; and Tāmra was in charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many soldiers.

असिलोमा तयोदकों बिडालाख्य शाकपतः ।

त्रिजोउध तथा कालबन्धको बलदर्पितः ॥ 4 ॥

There were, then, many gencrals Asilomā, Vidāla, Udarka, Bāskala, Trinetra, Kāla, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each in charge of his own corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt earth.

एते सै-ययुता: सर्वे दानवा मेदिति ताद ।

आयुल्य संशित्या: काममुख्यो सागगमेखलाम् ॥ 5 ॥

कराद्धि कृता: सर्वे भूमिपाला: पुरातना: ।

निहता ये बलोद्वाः क्षानप्रभ्यविधिताः ॥ 6 ॥

O king! The powerful kings that reigned before were made subservient and tributary; and those, that fought vaunility befitting the Kṣattriya line, were slain by Mahiṣa.

ब्राह्मणा वरणा जाता यज्ञापासमर्पका: ।

महिषय्य महाराज निखिले श्रितिमण्डले ॥ ७ ॥

The Brāhmaṇas over the earth becama subservient to Mahiṣa and gave their Yajña offerings to him.

एकातपधे तत्राम्यं कृत्वा स महिषासुर: ।

स्वर्गे जेतु मनघक्रे वरादानेन ग्रविंतः ॥ ८ ॥

When that Mahisāsura got the sole sovereign

Šrnuaddevibhāgavatam

sway of this world, he proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens.

प्राणियाँ प्रश्वासाम श्यातिरस्तु शनीपतिम् ।

स सन्देशहं श्रीप्रभादूयोबार इत्यतर् ॥ ९ ॥

Then Mahiṣa, the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord of Śacī, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus:

गच्छ बीर महाबाही दुत्तलं कुक मेउनय ।

बृहि ग्राके दिवं नाला नि:गंकः सुरासिर्धी ॥ 10 ॥

Go, O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven." Act as my messenger and tell Indra fearlessly thus:

मुंघ खर्याँ सहसाक्ष ययेघं गच्छ माधिमम् ।

सेवां वा कुक देवेश महिषय साहात्मनः ॥ 11 ॥

स त्वां संस्थयेयूनं राजा शरणमागतम् ।

तस्मार्चं शरणं याहि महिषय सर्चीपते ॥ 12 ॥

नोघद्रजं गृहाणगु युद्धाय बलसूदन ।

पूर्वॉजितोस चास्माकं जनामि तव पीक्षम् ॥ 13 ॥

"O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; go anywhere you like, or offer your service to the highshould Mahisa! He is the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will certainly protect you. Therefore, O Lord of Śacī, better seek the protection of Mahisa. If, O Balasūdana! Not willing to do so, wield your Vajra at once; we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered by our ancestors."

अहत्याजार विज्ञातं बलं ते सुर्यंघ ।

युध्यस्व जत्र वा कामं यत्र ते रमेत मनः ॥ 14 ॥

O chief of the Sūras! You are the paramour of Ahalyā; your strength is well-known, give battle or go anywhere you like."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला घवर्न तस्य शक्र: क्रोधासम्वितः ।

उवाच तं नृपश्रेश सिमतपूर्वे घचस्तदा ॥ 15 ॥

न जाने३हं सुमन्दात्मन् यतस्तं मद्दर्पितः ।

चिकित्सां सूक्ष्त्रियामि रोगस्याय प्रभोतरा ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words, Indra became very indignant and laughed and said: “I did not know, O you stupid, that you were

maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for your master's disease."

अतः परं क्रियामि मूलस्याय निकृतनम् ।

गच्छ दुत तथा बृहि तस्यो मम भाषितम् ॥ 17 ॥

शिष्टैदूनान हन्तव्यात्मसाचां विशुबामवहम् ।

युद्धच्छा चेत्समागच्छ त्वितो महिषीमुत ॥ 18 ॥

हयोर न्वढृतं ज्ञातं शुणास्तवर्न जडाकृति: ।

श्रगयोते कारीव्यामि सुरुर्धं च शगासनम् ॥ 19 ॥

"Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise persons do not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go and tell him what I say: "Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, better come and do not delay." "O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and horses are always at war with each other) Your strength is well known to me; you are a grass eater and your appearance is stupid, idiotic; out of your horns I will make a good bow." "You depend on your horns for your strength; that I well know.

दर्प: श्रंगवालान्तेस्ति विवितं कारणं मया ।

विषाणे ते परिस्थित्या संहित्यामि तदूलम् ॥ 20 ॥

यद्रतेनातिपूर्णस्वं जातोस्ति वलदार्थितः ।

कुशलस्वं तदायाने न युद्धे महिषाधम ॥ 21 ॥

You are clever in striking with your horns; you don't know anything about warfare; therefore I will cut off your both the weapons and render you powerless. You are very much puffed up with vanity due to that.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तोउसी सुरो-द्रेण स दुतस्वचितरी गतः ।

जगाम महिषं मन्ते प्रणाय्य प्रज्युवाच ७ ॥ 22 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly returned to his haughty master Mahisa and saluting, spoke:

दूत उवाच

राजन्देवाधिष कामां न त्वा विगणायत्यसौ ।

मयते स्ववर्त पूर्णं देवसैन्यसामावृतः ॥ 23 ॥

The messenger said: "Indra counts you not even a fig, as he is surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite sufficient.

Book V Chapter III

यदुर्फं तेन मुखैंग कथमन्यदूबवीभ्यहम् ।

प्रिय सलं च वक्त्वयं भूत्वेन पुतः प्रभो: ॥ 24 ॥

If ought one's servant to speak true and pleasant before one's master, how can I utter the words before my master, that are spoken by that brute Indra."

प्रिय सलं च वक्त्वयं प्रभोरो शुभेच्छुना ।

इति नितिमहात्राज जागर्ति शुभकारिणी ॥ 25 ॥

Whereas the well known maxim reigns in my mind withal that I am your well-wishing servant and I ought to speak truth before you, my master, and that truth is to be pleasant to hear also.

केवलं चेत्रियं ब्याज ते कार्य भाविष्यति ।

परभं च न वक्त्वं कदाचिच्छुभमिच्छता ॥ 26 ॥

If pleasant words I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the same time, harsh words ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere will-wisher.

यथा रिपुभुवाद्वारः प्रसरन्ति विषयोपाः ।

तथा भृत्यमुखाग्राव नि:सरन्ति कर्थ गिरः ॥ 27 ॥

यादुशानीह वाक्यानि तेनोक्तानि महीपते ।

तादुशानि न मे विज्ञा वतुर्महति कहिंघित् ॥ 28 ॥

My Lord! The cruel poison-like words that come from the mouth of an enemy, how can I, a servant of yours, utter those harsh sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I will never be able to utter those rude sayings that Indra has spoken.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य हेतुगर्भं तृणाशनः ।

भूगं कोपपरीताता बभूव महिषासुरः ॥ 29 ॥

समाह्याववारीह्यानकोधसंरक्तलोचनः ।

तर्णूलं पृड्डरेगे च कृत्वा मूर्ष परित्यजन ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: “Hearing the messenger’s words full of meaning, the grass cater Mahisā Dānava got very angry and, waggling his tail behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, he called the Dānavas before him and said:

भे भो दैवाः सुरैंडोजी युद्धकामोप्रेति सर्वथा ।

बलोद्योगं कुर्वयं वै जेतव्योजरी सुरायमः ॥ 31 ॥

“O Dānavas! The Lord of the Devas is firmly

resolved on battle; therefore collect your forces; we will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Suras.

मद्यो को भवेच्छूरः कोटिगश्छेनाशविधाः ।

न विभेम्येकतः कामं इनिध्याय्यदा सर्वथा ॥ 32 ॥

Who can stand for him as my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of warriors like Indra come, I do not fear any of them at all; O Dānavas, we will thoroughly put an end to him.

शूरः शान्तेचस्पी नूनं तपस्विष्य बताधिकः ।

बलकर्ता हि कुहको लैप्टः पर्वात्रत् ॥ 33 ॥

His heroism is before only those that are peaceful and quiet, before the ascetics that have become lean and thin by penances; he is licentious and can only seduce other's wives by craftiness and arts.

अपरोबलसम्पत्नपोचिनकाः खलः ।

छिद्रप्ररण: यापो नित्य विश्वासयातकः ॥ 34 ॥

He is a thorough rogue and hypocrite, vicious and fault-finding; otherwise why does he put obstacles before others, depending for his strength only on the beauties of the Apsarās or heavenly prostitutes.

नापुचिनिरुक्तो येन कृत्वा सन्धि दुरावमना ।

नषायान्विवियानादौ कृत्वा भौतिन छघना ॥ 35 ॥

He is treachrous to very core; therefore he, being afraid at the very outset, took oaths, and entered into agreement with the high-souled Namuci; afterwards, when his time turned favourable, that villian broke his treaty and treacherously killed him."

विष्यानु कमटाचारः कुटकः शयाकाः ।

नानासपरः कामं बलकुर्भ्यपिडतः ॥ 36 ॥

Again the powerful Viṣṇu is a thorough master of treachery and hypocrisy, quick in taking oaths and can only show his vanity and is expert in that. He can assume many forms at will by his Māyic power."

कृत्वा कोलाप्तिकी येन हिरण्याक्षो निपातितः ।

हिरण्यक्रिशपुष्पैन् नृसिंहेन च पातितः ॥ 37 ॥

For these very reasons Viṣṇu had to take the form of a boar and kill Hiranyāksa; and again he had to take up a man-lion form to kill Hiranya Kaśipu.

नाहं तद्धगो नूनं भवेयं दनुनन्दना: ।

विश्वासं नैव गच्छापि देवानां कुक कहिंघित् ॥ 38 ॥

O Dānavas! Never shall I surrender myself to Viṣṇu, for I never place my trust in the words or deeds of Viṣṇu and his Devas.

किं कसिवाति मे विद्याप्रौत्रो वा वलवस्तः ।

रूजे वापि न मे शक़ः प्रतिकर्तू रणांगणे ॥ 39 ॥

What can Indra or Viṣṇu do against me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight against me in the battlefield!

त्रिविष्टं प्रतिष्यामि तिजेन्द्रं वरुणं यमम् ।

धनदं पाककं चैव चन्द्रपूर्वीं विजित्व च ॥ 40 ॥

वझभाभपुज: सर्वे पशिव्यामोउढा सोभाप: ।

त्रिवा देवसमूहं च विहित्यामि दानवैः ॥ 41 ॥

I will instantly defeat Indra, Varuna, Yama, Kubera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their Heavens. On our conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of Yajñas and we along with other Dānavas drink the Soma juice and enjoy ourselves in Heaven.

न मे भयं सुरोभ्युं खरादानेन दानवाः ।

मरणं न नरोभ्युं नारी किं मे कारिष्यति ॥ 42 ॥

O Dānavas! I have got the boon; what do I now care for the Devas. My death is not from men too. What can a woman do to me?

पातालपवैतैभ्यघ स्माहुव राजनारन् ।

द्रावनावाम सै-योगात्कुवंतु त्वलिताश्रर: ॥ 4 3 ॥

O my emissaries! Call without any delay the chief Dānavas from the nether regions and the mountains and make them my generals?

एकोडे सर्वदेवेशगतिविजतुं दानावा: शमः ।

शोभाषं वः समाहूय नयामि सुरसुझमे ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Dānavas! I can alone conquer all the Devas; only to make war arrangements look nice, that I am taking you to defeat them.

श्रृगायां च खुतायां च हनियेड़र्ग सुगतिकल ।

न मे भयंं सुरेय्यछु खरतानप्रभावतः ॥ 45 ॥

There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent on the boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns.

अवध्योड़ं सुरगणैरसुरैमान्वैस्तथा ।

तस्मालज्ञा भवन्त्यद्वे देवलोकजयाय दै ॥ 46 ॥

I am not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves ready to conquer the Devas.

त्रिला सुरालयं दैत्वा विकृत्तियामि नन्दने ।

मन्दारकुभुमपीडा देवयोषित्यमित्राने ॥ 47 ॥

O Dānavas! After conquering the Heavens we will be garlanded with Pārijāta wreaths and we will enjoy the Deva women in the Nandana Garden.

कामधेनुपयोसितभा: सुधापानप्रमोदिता: ।

देवान्यर्वर्गीतादितून्यलायमसपिततः ॥ 48 ॥

We will drink the milk of the heavenly mulching cow (the cow that yields all desires) and, intoxicated with the heavenly drinks, we will hear and see the music and singing the dancing of the Gandharvas there.

उद्वीगी मेमका राभा घृताभी च तिलोत्ताम ।

प्रमद्धरा महासेना मिश्रक्षेगी महोल्कटा ॥ ४ १ ॥

You will all be served there with various bottles of wine by Urvaśī, Menakā, Rambhā, Ghṛtāci, Tillottamā, Pramadvarā Mahāsenā, Miśra Keśi, Madotkatā.

विद्यचितिप्रपृतवी नृत्यनीतिविशपराद: ।

रूत्रविष्यन्ति वः सर्वांत्रानसविनिवेशीः ॥ 50 ॥

Vipracitti and others. Then be all ready at once for the auspicious occasion to march to Heaven and fight there with the Suras.

सर्वे सज्जा घर्वेल्हा रोत्नां गमनं दिवि ।

संग्रामार्थ सुरैः साधुं कृत्वा मुकूलपुत्तमम् ॥ 51 ॥

स्थूलार्थ च स्वर्वं घानांरं घुनिस्तमम् ।

समाहूच च संपूज्य स्थाय्य चेत्रे गुरुं परम् ॥ 52 ॥

And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni Sukrācārya, the son of Bhrgu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship him and tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and victory of the Dānavas."

Book V Chapter IV

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>इति सन्निर्यय दैत्येन्द्रान्माधिष: पाघपीस्तदा ।</td></tr><tr><td>जगाम त्वितीता राजन्मेवनं स्यं मुदात्यितः ॥ 5 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे ततुर्भरकन्मे दैत्यसैन्योहोगे नाम तृतीयोउतयान: ॥ 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>Vyāsa said: O king! Thus, ordering the chief</td></tr></table>

Dānavas, the wicked Mahiṣa went to his abode, with gladness.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies getting ready in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa of 18,000 verses.

Book V Chapter IV

CHAPTER IV

On the War Counsels Given by Indra

व्यास उवाच

गते दुते सुरेन्द्रोप्रि समाहूय सुरान्य ।

यमावायुभान्यक्ष्मणानिवमूचिवान् ॥ 1 ॥

महिषो नाम दैवेन्द्रो रमभूत्रो महावलः ।

वरदर्भमेदो-मन्तो मायाशतविश्वक्षणः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger of the Dānavas having departed, Indra, the lord of the Devas, Yama, Vāyu, Varuna, and Kubera and other Devas, called an assembly and addressed thus: "O Devas! the most powerful Mahisa, the son of Rambha, is now the king of the Dānavas; he is particularly expert in hundred of Māyās (māyic) and has become haughty on the strength of his boon."

तस्य दृतोडा सम्यालतः प्रेषितसेन भोः सुरा: ।

स्वर्गकामेन लुब्धिन मायुवारोदूर्ण वचः ॥ 3 ॥

O Devas! Mahiṣa has sent his messenger; he wants to take possession of the heaven; he come down to me and spoke thus:

स्वज देवालयं शक्र यदेष्छं जज वासव ।

सेवां वा कुरू दैत्यस्य महिषस्य महात्मनः ॥ 4 ॥

“O Indra! Quit your this heaven and go any where you like, or be ready to pay your homage to the high souled Mahisāsura, the Lord of the Dānavas.”

दयावादानवेत्रोउसी से तुक्ति विधायती।

से तेषु भृत्यभूतेषु न कुण्यति कदाचन ॥ 5 ॥

The Dānava Chief never becomes angry with his opponent who becomes submissive like a servant; if you surrender and serve him, he will, out of mercy, grant an allowance to you.

नोचेबुद्धाय देवेश सेनोहोांगं कुर स्ववम् ।

गते माय स दैल्येन्द्रस्वित्तः समुपेथति ॥ 6 ॥

O Lord of the Devas! If this does not behave you, then collect your forces and be ready for fight; no sooner I return, the Lord of the Dānavas will come here at once ready to give battle to you.

इत्युक्त्वा स गतो तृती दानवस्य दुरात्मनः ।

क्रिं कतन्यमतः कार्य चित्तपत्थं सुरोतमाः ॥ ७ ॥

Thus saying, the messenger of that wicked Dānava departed. Now what are we to do? O Devas! Think on that.

दुबलेतीपि न चोधेक्यः शुब्बैलवता सुरा: ।

विशोधेण सदोद्योगी बलवान्बलदार्यितः ॥ 8 ॥

O Devas! Even a weak enemy is not to be overlooked by a powerful opponent, especially when the enemy is powerful by his own powers and is ever energetic, never is he to be overlooked.

उद्यम: कलि कर्तेणी यथा बुद्धिद्यां बलम् ।

दैवाधीनी भवेघूनं जयो वाउध पराजयः ॥ 9 ॥

It is always incumbent on us to make our efforts, as best as we can, both by our body and mind as far as lies in our power; the result, victory or defeat depends entirely on Fate.

सचिव्योगो न चागसित खले सचित्रिनिर्वकः ।

सर्वथा साधुभि: कार्य विचार्य च पुन: पुनः ॥ 10 ॥

It is useless to make treaty with a deceitful and dishonest person; we therefore never should make treaty with this person; you are all honest; that Dānava is dishonest; therefore ponder and ponder deeply and ponder again; do you that which is proper.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

यानमध्यून नैव कत्लेंव सहसा पुनः ।

प्रेशकाः प्रेषणीयाशु शीर्भगाः सुप्रेशकाः ॥ १ १ ॥

It is not advisable to go out at once for fight when we are unaware of our enemy's strength; let us therefore send spies truthful, honest, motiveless, quick, to ascertain their strength, those who can easily enter amongst our enemies and yet who have no relation, nor any interest with them.

ईक्तिज्ञान्थ निसज्ञा निस:सुखा निस:सुखा सत्यबालिनः ।

सेनापियोगं प्रव्यानं बलसेंख्यां यथावीतः ॥ 12 ॥

The arrangements of their forces, their movements, their numbers, they will ascertain correctly; who are their generals, what is their number and what is their strength, they will thoroughly examine and return here quickly.

वीरणांच च परिज्ञानं कृत्वा यान्तु त्वारपिततः ।

त्राला दैत्यपतेतस्य सै-नस्य च बलाबलम् ॥ 13 ॥

First, we will ascertain the strength of the force of our opposite party and then we will decide at once whether we will start for battle or seek protection within forts.

कौर्यामि ततस्तूर्णे याता वा दुर्गसंग्रहम् ।

"विषायं खतु कतैल्यं कार्य बुद्धिपता सदा ।"

सहसा विहितं कार्य दुःखदं सर्वधा भवेत् ॥ 14 ॥

Wise persons always consider before they act; any act done rashly leads in all respects to many troubles, and anything done after mature prejudgments leads to happiness; so the wise do.

तस्मादिपूग्य कतैलं सुखदं सर्वथा बुधैः ।

नात्र भेदविधिन्यान्यो दानवेषु च सर्वथा ॥ 15 ॥

The Dānavas are all one in their heart and mind; therefore it is not advisable, in any way to apply the principal of Bheda (sowing principles of discord).

एकशित्रेषु कार्येस्सिमस्तमाचारा जन्तु वै ।

ज्ञाला बतालतं तेषां पश्ञाजिति विचार्य च । । १ ६ ॥

Let our spies go there, ascertain their strength, return and inform us; we will then judge what principle is proper and apply to the expert Dānavas.

विधेधा विधिचित्जैस्तेषु कार्यपेषु च ।

अन्यथा विहितं कार्य विव्यतिफत्पत्रम् ॥ १ ७ ॥

सर्वथा तद्वेक्नूनमज्ञातपोषधं यथा ।

Any act done contrary to policy and expediency will undoubtedly produce effects contrary in every way just like a medicine which we have not tried already.

व्यास उवाच

इति संचित्य तै: सर्वे: प्राणिधं कार्यवेदिन् ॥ १ ॥

प्रेयवामास देवेऋः: परिज्ञानाय पार्थिवः ।

दूतस्तु चित्तीत गत्वा समागम्य सुर्गाधिधम् ॥ १९ ॥

निवेदयामास तदा सर्वे सैन्यवलावनम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus counselling with the Devas, Indra, sent expert spies to ascertain the true state of affairs. The spies, too, went into the abode of the Daityas, with no delay and made their searches thoroughly into every nook and corner and returned and told Indra all the strength of the Dānava force.

ज्ञाना तद्वलपुत्रोगे तुरापाडतिविसितः ॥ 20 ॥

देवानचोदयनुर्ण समाहूय पुरीहिनम् ।

मन्नं मन्नविंशं श्रेष्ठ चकार विदशेष्यः ॥ 21 ॥

उवाचांगिरासश्रेष्ठ समासीने वासने ।

Indra was very much startled to know, then, of their arrangements. He immediately bade all the Devas be ready for battle and called for his High priest Bhraspati, expert in giving advices and began to consult with him how to carry on the warfare with that indomitable enemy, the Lord of the Asuras. On Bhraspati, the best and famous of the Aginā family, taking his excellent seat.

इन्र उवाच

घो भो देवगुर्गे विद्धिकं कत्थं वद्यव नः ॥ 22 ॥

सर्वैज्ञोसि समुपवे कार्यं त्व गतिच्छ नः ।

Indra thus said: "O Guru of the Devas! O Learned! Please say what are we to do now in this critical juncture? You are omniscient; today you are our guide.

दानवो महिषो नाम महार्थीवर्ग मदोत्तिथ : ॥ 23 ॥

योढ़ुकामः समायाति बहुभिद्वनिवैवृतः ।

Book V Chapter IV

The Demon Mahisa has become very powerful, very haughty; surrounded by Dānavas he is now coming to fight with us.

तत्र प्रतिक्रिया कार्यं त्वया मन्त्रविद्धपुना ॥ 24 ॥

तेषा शुक्रतथा त्वं मे विन्तहतां सुसंयतः ।

You are expert in mantras; find out the remedy for us. Śukrācārya is the remover of all obstacles on their side; and that you are our safe guard is well known to us.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं प्राह तुलासहं बृह्यसितः ॥ 25 ॥

विविच्य मनसा कामं कार्वसाधानतपर: ।

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of Indra, Brhaspati, who is always ready to effect the Deva's purposes, thought intently on the subject, said very shortly thus :

गुरुक्षवाच

स्वस्यो भव सुरेन्र त्वं धीयमोल्ब्य मारिष १ 2 6 १।

यवमने च समुचये न त्याज्यं धीयागु वै ।

Brhaspati spoke: O Lord of the Devas! O Venerable One! Be peaceful; have patience; when a difficulty comes, one should not, all on a sudden, lose one's patience.

वयाजयी सुराध्यक्ष देवार्थिनी सदैव हि ॥ 27 ॥

स्वातयं दीयमातंव्य तस्मादुबुद्धिमता सदा ।

O Chief of the Immortals! Victory or defeat is completely under the control of destiny; therefore intelligent ones should always be patient.

भवित्यं भवत्येव जानत्रेव शतक्नो ॥ 28 ॥

उद्यम: सर्वेथा कायों यद्यापौरभयामना ।

O Śatakratu! What will unavoidably be done must come to pass; knowing this as certain, one would always be an enthusiast and exert one's powers.

मुनयोपि हि मुक्नवयंमुधामैकरता: सदा ॥ 29 ॥

दैवधार्थि च जानन्तो योगाध्यानपरायणा: ।

तस्मासदैव कर्तैवो स्वहारोदितोदाय: ॥ 30 ॥

सुखं भवतु या मा वा दैव का परिवेदना ।

विना पुरुषकारेण कदाचिशसिद्धमानुयात् ॥ 31 ॥

अन्यवत्पडूवत्कामां न तथा मुदामाबहेत् ।

कृते पुरुषकारोंपि यदि सिद्धिनं जायते ॥ 32 ॥

Everything is guided by Fate. Knowing this, the Munis devote themselves at all times solely filled with energy in their meditation and Yoga practices for their final liberation. Therefore, to show one's energy, according to the rules of the daily practices, ought to be indespensably done; and one should not repent or feel pleasure on failure or success; for that is under Fate. Success sometimes comes without the exercise of one's own powers, as seen in cases of the lame and the blind; and that is not the reason why one should be very glad.

न तत्र दूषणं तस्य दैवाधिने श्रौरिपि ।

कार्यसिद्धिर्नं सैनैर्जस्ति न मनेन न च मज्यो ॥ 33 ॥

न रथे नायुधे नूनं दैवाधीनासुरापि ।

The embodied beings are all under Daiva (Fate); therefore, even if success be not attained, though one's own powers are exercised thoroughly, no one is to blame for that. O Lord of the Suras? What to say of forces, mantras, or advices, what if chariots or weapons, nothing is to lead to success; It is Daiva, and only Daiva that makes one successful.

बलवान्वलेषाग्यानोति निर्विलः सुखम्यनुते ॥ 34 ॥

बुद्धिमान्थ्यितः शेने निर्विद्धभोगवान्ययेत् ।

कातारो जययान्तोने शुग्रे याति पराजयम् ॥ 35 ॥

धवाधिने तु संसारे कामं का परिदेवना ।

उद्यो योजयेनुं भवित्वयं सुराधि ॥ 36 ॥

दुःखदे सुखदे वार्थि तत्र तो न विधितंयेत् ।

This whole universe is under Daiva; it is, therefore, that we see powerful persons suffering pains, and weak ones getting happiness; the intelligent ones sleeping without any food and fools enjoying merrily; distressed persons getting victory and powerful ones suffering defeats; what cares, then, ought one to entertain in this. O Lord of the Suras! Whatever is inevitable to come to pass, be it success or failure, one will lead one's

Šimaddevbīhgāvatam

energies to that end; therefore one needs to consider beforehand whether one's energies will be successful or not. In times of distress, one sees distress too much; and in times of pleasure, one seeks pleasure too much; one's self, therefore one should not surrender to one's enemies pleasure and pain.

कुर्ये दुःखाधिकान्यपेसुरेषे पशेस्युखाधिकम् ३ 37 ॥

आमानं हर्षीकोकायां सुब्याधीमव नार्येत् ।

धीयमेवावगानलंहं हर्षीकोद्वे वृष्टे: ॥ 38 ॥

अर्थयोद्याणुरं कुं त्र न दुर्धेंयित तादुपग् ।

दुर्लंभं सहन्तवे वै समये सुखदुःखयो: ॥ 39 ॥

हर्षीकोद्वीय तय न यवेवेतुद्विन्दिश्यात् ।

किं कुःखं कस्य वा कुःखं निरुणोड़े सदाजययः ॥ 40 ॥

चतुर्बिशातिरित्तोउस्मि किं मे दुःखं सुखं च किम् ।

प्राणस्य कृष्णविपासे हैः मनसः शोकमूच्छैप ॥ 41 ॥

जगमूच्यगुरीरस्य चकुर्भिरिक्तः शिवः ।

Pain and suffering is not felt so much in patience as is felt when impatient; therefore one must practise patience when pain or pleasure comes. Indeed, it is very difficult to bear oneself up in distress or happiness; therefore wise persons try not to let these feelings crop up at all from the very beginning. “I am always full, undiminishable, I am beyond Prākrtiç qualities. Who is there to suffer? What is suffering?” Thus one ought to think at that moment. I am beyond the twenty four Tattvas; what pleasure or pain can, arise to me? Hunger and thirst are the Dharma of Prāna; pain and insensibility is the Dharma of mind, old age and death belong to this physical body. I am free from these six diseases; I am Śiva.

गोकामोही शरीरस्य गुणी किं मेउत्र चिंतते ॥ 42 ॥

शरीरं नात्यमयात तत्सव्यनी न चायह्म।

सपैकेकोडगादिष्यो विभिन्नोड़ं सदा सुखी ॥ 43 ॥

प्रकृतिर्विकृतिराई किं मे दुःखं सदा पुनः ।

इति मत्वा सुरेश त्वं मनसा भव निर्ममः ॥ 44 ॥

Grief and delusion are the qualities of this body; what then do I care for them? “I” am not the qualities of the body nor “I” am the soul pertaining

to that. I am beyond the seven transfigurations, change, e.g. Mahat, etc., I am beyond this Prakrti, Nature, and beyond the sixteen changes wrought out by Prakrti; I am therefore eternally happy, I am beyond Prakrti and its transformation, then why am I to suffer pain always? O Lord of the Suras! Think on these and be without any passion.

उपायः प्रथमोउन ते दुःखनागे शतक्रतो ।

ममता परमं दुःखं निर्ममत्वं परं सुखम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

सन्तोबादपरं नास्ति सुखस्थानं शबीपते ।

अथवा यदि न जानं ममत्वनाग्ने किल ॥ 4 6 ॥

ततो विवेकः कर्तेबो भवित्ये सुराधिप ।

प्रारक्षकर्मणां नागो नाभोगतलस्थवे किल ॥ 4 7 ॥

यद्धालि तद्धलयेव का चिन्ता सुखुख्यवो ।

O Śatakratu! This attachment is the root of all miseries; and non-attachment is the source of all happiness; non-attachment, therefore, is the chief means of the extirpation of all your troubles. O Lord of Śachi! Nothing can be happier than contentment. In case you do find it difficult to practise dispassion, apply, then, discrimination and think of Fate, that what comes inevitably to pass. O Lord of the Suras! Actions already done cannot die out without their effects being enjoyed.

सु: सर्वै: सहायैर्वां बुद्धा वा तल सत्ता ॥ 48 ॥

सुर्ज क्षयाय पुण्यस्य दु:खं पायस्य मारिति ।

O Best of the Suras! Let all your intelligence be brought to action, let all the Devas lend their helping hands to you; what is inevitable must come to pass; what then can you care for your happiness or pain?

तस्मात्सुखक्षये हर्ष: कतन्व्य: सर्वेबा बुधै: ॥ 49 ॥

अश्वा मन्त्रलाड़ कुरु यन्तं यथाविषि ।

कृते यन्ते महाराज भवित्वयं भविष्यति ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पढ़मकन्के

चतुर्धोध्याः ॥ 4 ॥

O King! Happiness is felt for the expiation of good deeds and pain is felt for the expiation of bad deeds; therefore wise persons get thoroughly delighted when their punya ends. O King! Judge

Book V Chapter V

and hold a council today; then try your best. But what is unavoidable will come to pass, even if you try your best.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the counsels given by Indra in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter V

CHAPTER V

On the Defeat of the Dānava Forces of Mahisā

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा सहसाधः पुनराह बृह्यस्तिन् ।

युद्धोर्णं करिष्यामि ह्यानेनिशनाय वे ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The thousand-eyed Indra, hearing this, again asked Brūṣapati that he would make preparations for war against Mahisāsura.

नोद्योन विना राज्यं न सुखं न च वै यशः ।

निरुद्धायं न शंसिति कातता न च सोहायः ॥ 2 ॥

Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no nor happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they exol effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that.

यतीनां भृपणं ज्ञानं सन्तोषो हि ह्विजनमान्।

उद्यम: श्रत्रुकनं भूषणं भूतिमच्छताम ॥ ३ ॥

Knowledge is the ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the Brāhmanas; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and prowess to destroy one's enemies are their excellent ornaments.

उद्यमेन हतल्याष्ट्री नपुचिबल एव च ।

तर्वेनं निर्हिन्यापि मदिषं नुप्सितस्म ॥ 4 ॥

O Muni! I will kill this Mahisāsura by my heroism as I had, of old, destroyed Vṛtta, Namuci and Balāsura.

वलं देवगुरुस्तं पे घड़ामायुधतुमम् ।

सहायस्तु हरितूनं तथोपापतित्वयः ॥ 5 ॥

You are the Deva Guru; therefore you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hari and Hara also will help me in this.

रक्षोटानयट मे साधो करोग्यदा समुदायम् ।

स्वरैन्यार्थिनियं च महिंत्र प्रति मानद ॥ 6 ॥

O Guru! Preserver of my honour and prestige! Now recite the mantras calculated to remove all

the obstacles towards my victory. I, too, am making preparations and raising up my own forces to wage up war against that Dānava Mahiṣa.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो देवराजेन वायस्यतिकावाच ह ।

सुरेन्द्रं युद्धसरांक सिमतपूर्वं वचलसाद ॥ ७ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing Indra's words, Brāhspati smiled and said: "O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from your the purpose. The issue is doubtful.

ब्रह्मसतिकावच

प्रेयामि न चाहं त्वां न च निवर्तेयामदम् ।

सन्दिष्योज जये कामं युध्यतश्र पाजाये ॥ 8 ॥

There may be defeat or there may be victory. O Lord of Śacī! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is written in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat.

न तेउन दूषणं किकड्ज्द्वितन्त्ये जशीयते ।

सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं द्विक्तं च भविष्यति ॥ १ ॥

I am not aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already what an amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when my wife had been stolen.

न मया व्यस्तिर्ज्ञां भावि दुःखं सुखं तथा ।

यद्वायहिरणे प्राप्तं पुगा सामव वेसि सि ॥ १० ॥

O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had been stolen by Moon who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of an householder, I was put to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my happiness.

शशिना में हता भार्यों निश्चेगामिकर्जन ।

स्वाभ्रमश्चेन सम्याप्त दुःखं सर्वसुखापहम् ॥ १ ॥

Šrimaddevibthāgavatam

ब्रुद्धिमान्सर्वलोकेषु विवितोर्जे सुराधिप ।

क्व मे गता तता बुद्धिदंदा भार्यां हता कवतात ॥ 12 ॥

O Lord of the Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a man of much wisdom and intelligence. Where then was my intelligence, when Moon carried away, perforce, my wife.

तमायुपायः कत्नोये बुद्धिमद्धिः सदा सरे: ।

कार्यसिद्धिः सदा नूनं देवधीनीय सुरापीध ॥ 13 ॥

O Lord of the Suras! To my mind, success or failure depends entirely on destiny; yet intelligent ones should always resort to efforts and be energetic.

3 यास उवाच

तच्छुवा वचनं सत्यं गुरोः सार्थि श्रवीपितः ।

ब्रहाणां शरणं पत्या नत्वा वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ 14 ॥

विनामहं सुगाध्यक्ष दैत्यो महिषर्शकाः ।

ग्रहीतुकामाः स्वर्ग में वक्तोषांगं करोलत्यम् ॥ 15 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On hearing the words of Brhaṣpati, pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahmā, took his refuge and saluting him said: O Grand Sire! The Dānavas are collecting a big army, and wants to conquer and take possession of the Heavens.

अन्ये च तयावा: सर्वे तत्सैन्यं समुपस्थिता: ।

योत्पुकामा महावीधीः सर्वे युद्धविशारादः ॥ 16 ॥

All the other Dānavas have enrolled themselves in the list of his army; they are eager to fight and they are all very powerful and skilled in arts of warfare.

तेनाहं घीतभीतोउभि्य तलसकाशमिहारतः ।

सर्वज्ञोसि महाप्रात साहाययं कत्नुमहिंसि ॥ 17 ॥

I am therefore very afraid and have come to you. You know everything; please help me in this matter.

ब्रहोवाच

गच्छामः सर्वे एवाहि केलासं स्विता वयम् ।

शूक्तं पुस्तः कृत्वा विष्णुं च बलिनां वयम् ॥ 18 ॥

Brahmā said: We all will go today to the Mount Kailāsa and take Śaṅkara with us and go to Viṣṇu.

ततो युद्ध प्रकर्त्व्य सर्वैः सुरगणैः सह ।

मिलिता मन्यमाधाय देशं काला विधित्य च ॥ १९ ॥

There all the Devas, assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, when it will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight.

बलाबलमवित्रतं विवेकमपहाय च ।

साहसं तु प्रकृत्यागी नरः पतनमूच्छिति ॥ 20 ॥

For one who dares to do any act without considering one's strength and without any judgment, certainly courts his own downfall.

व्यास उवाच

तश्रिण्य सहस्वाक्ष: कैलासं निर्जीगाम है ।

ब्रहाणं पुतः कृत्वा लोकपालसमविन्तः ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other Lokāpalas and Devas, headed by Brahmā, went to Kailāśa.

तृषाव शड़हं नरा वेदन-नैमेहंधम् ।

प्रसर्च पत: कृत्वा यद्यै विद्युपुरं प्रति ॥ 22 ॥

Then they came to Śaṅkara and sang vedic hymns to him. Maheśvara became very much pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikuntha, the abode of Viṣṇu.

स्तुत्वा तं देवदेवेशं कार्य प्रोवाच चामनः ।

महिषात्मद्धं चोर्धं वरदानमदोढ़तान् ॥ 23 ॥

Indra saluted Viṣṇu and sang hymns to him, and told about his errand thus: “Mahīṣa has become very haughty on account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very afraid (and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).

तत्करणं घयं तस्य विज्युद्वितानुवाच ह ।

क्रतिथायो वयं युद्ध हनिष्यामस्तु दुर्जनम् ॥ 24 ॥

Viṣṇu, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them: "We all will fight and kill that Demon."

व्यास उवाच

इति ते निशयं कृत्वा ब्रह्धिष्युहीक्षा: ।

स्वानि स्वानि समासष्ठ वाहतानिय क्युः सुः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus settling the questions, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hari and Indra and the other

Book V Chapter V

Devas riding on their own Vāhanas (means of conveyance) respectively dispersed.

बहा हंससमाको विष्णुगंडवहानः ।

गंकते वृषभाक्तो वृत्रहा गरसंश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

मयूरवाहनः क्वन्तो यमो महिषवाहनः ।

कृत्वा सैन्यसमायोगं घावते निर्वयुः सुरा: ॥ 27 ॥

तादहैर्यवलं प्राप्तं चूनं महिष्यपालिनम् ।

ततभूतभूतनं युद्धे देवदानवसैन्ययो: ॥ 28 ॥

While Brahmā on his vehicle Swan, Viṣṇu on his Garuda, Śaṅkara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airāvata, Kārtika on his peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vāhana, the Buffalo, were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army of the Dānava Mahisa met them on their way, all fully equipped with arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas and the Dānavas.

वागी: खड़रीत्या प्रासैमुलेष्ते पघधोः।

गदाधि: पद्ट्रीश: गृत्योक्षेक्षे शक्तितापे: ॥ 29 ॥

मुढैर्धिन्यपालैंह छटीक्षातिदाकणी: ।

अन्यैक्षि विविधरखैर्निजनुले पस्पमम् ॥ 30 ॥

Arrowas, axes, Prāsas, Mūsalas (clubs), Paraśus (pick axes), Gadās (clubs), Pattisās, Sūlas (tridents), Cakras (discus) Śakti (weapons), Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipālas, Lāngalas, and various other deadly weapons appeared on the scene with which they fought against one another.

सेनानीश्रिक्षुरतस्य गजार्को महावलः ।

मथवन्तं पशुधभसैः सायकैः समताड्यत् ॥ 31 ॥

The Commander-in-Chief of Mahisa, the very powerful Ciksura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra.

तृग्याड़ी पतिछला वाणीबाणांस्वात्रिलतः ।

हदये चाधधन्नेण ताउवामास ते कृती ॥ 32 ॥

The ever-ready and light-handed Indra, too, with his arrows cut off all of them and struck at his heart heavily with his Ardachandra (half moon) arrow.

बाणाहतसु सेनानीः प्राण मूच्छा गजोपये ।

वर्णं वज्ञायनेस स ज्ञान करे ततः ॥ 33 ॥

तद्ध्रापिछातो नागो भवनः सैन्यं जगाम ह ।

दृष्ट्वा ते दैव्यगद् कुब्दो विज्ञालास्मधावर्जीत् ॥ 34 ॥

गच्छ वीर महावाहो जहाँई मदार्यादिनम् ।

वरणाधीर्यान्दोबान्द्वासप्राव्यमान्तिकम् ॥ 35 ॥

The Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the back of his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with his Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the Vajra fled away into the Dānava's forces, The Lord of the Dānavas seeing this, got very angry and addressed the general Vidāla "O Hero! You are very powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; then kill Varuna and other Devas and come back to me."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य विज्ञालायो महावलः ।

आहकही वाकणं मर्त जगाम विद्याधिपनम् ॥ 36 ॥

Vyāsa said: The very powerful Vidāla, on receiving the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious elephant.

वासवस्तं समावानं नृद्वा क्रोभस्पनितः ।

ज्ञान विगिष्ठतस्तीक्षणीरागविषयमप्रधे: ॥ 37 ॥

Seeing him coming, Vāsava shot at him angrily with very terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes.

स तु त्रित्ता शतस्नुर्णं स्वरगैक्षापनि: सुतेः ।

पश्ठागर्द्रजक्रौभागृ आसचं च शिलीमुर्षे: ॥ 38 ॥

But the Demon, too, cut off those arrows at once with his excellent arrows and quickly shot at Vāsava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones.

तर्पेज्ञपि च तत्बाणिछित्वा कोपसमित्ति: ।

ज्ञान विज्ञास्त्रीक्षीरात्रिविस्वमप्रधे: ॥ ३१ ॥

स तु चित्वा शरांसृर्ण स्वरोंश्रापनि: सुतेः ।

गद्वा तात्यामास गजं तस्य क्रोपेरि ॥ 40 ॥

Indra cut off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly serpent like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemies' arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant's trunk with his Gadā (club).

स्वकरे निर्तहो नायश्रकारात्रैवरं मुहु: ।

परिवृत्य जयानागु दैत्यसैन्यं भयातुर्म् ॥ 41 ॥

The elephant, being thus struck on his head, cried aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, thus killing the Dānava forces as he fled away.

दानवस्तु गर्ज बीक्ष्य परावूल्य तत गर्ता ।

स्मार्विष्य रद्ये रच्ये जगामाशु सुर्गन् रणे ॥ 42 ॥

General Vidāla, seeing the elephant fleeing away from the battlefield, mounted on a beautiful chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight with them.

तृगधादि तं वीक्ष्य रथस्यं पुनरागतम् ।

अहनद्रिशिजैस्तीक्ष्योगशिविमसप्रमर्धे: ॥ 43 ॥

Seeing the Dānava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot at him sharp arrows after arrows like venomous snakes.

सोप्रि कुब्द्रशकायोरी याणवृष्टि महावल ।

बधूव तुयुले युद्धं तयोसत्र जयैषिणीः ॥ 44 ॥

The powerful Dānava, too, infuriated hurled at terrible arrows; then a sharp conflict ensued between Vāsava and the Dānava.

इस्ट्रस्टु बलिनं दूध्वा कोपेनाकुलितेंत्रिय ।

जयन्तमग्रतः कृत्वा युवुघे तेन संयुतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Finding the Dānava powerful, Vāsava's senses were confounded with anger; he then took his son Jayanta before him and began to fight.

जयन्तसु शितिवाँगीलेयं जयान सनानते ।

पड़धिः प्रवलक्रुहैरुर्ग मवर्याविंन ॥ 4 6 ॥

Jayanta stretched his bow tight and shot at the breast of the Dānava swollen with pride, five sharp arrows with his full strength. Thus shot at by the network of arrows with his full strength.

स वाणाधिरस्तावत्रियपत श्वोरिप ।

अतिनाहा रथे मुतो निजांगमा रणाजितरात ॥ 47 ॥

Thus shot at by the network of arrows, the Dānava fell unconscious on the chariot; the charioteer then fled away with his chariot from the battle-field.

तम्मिन्विनिर्ते दैते विडालाखेउव मूर्छित ।

जगगळो महानासीद्वनुभौनां च पि:स्वतः ॥ 48 ॥

Thus on the Dānava Vidāla becoming

unconscious and being taken away from the field, the Dundubhīs (drums) of the Devas were resounded and great aclamations of “Victory to the Devas” were heard.

सुग प्रभृदिता: सर्वे तुहुवुस्तं ज्ञाचीपतिम ।

जनुर्गधर्वेषतयो ननृतृधायसोपेगणः ॥ 49 ॥

The Devas were very glad and sounded hymns before Indra; the Gandharvas began to sing and the Apsarās began to dance.

चुकोप मधिष: शुत्वा जयग्वल सुरैः कृतम् ।

प्रेयायास तदेव तापं परमदायकम् ॥ 50 ॥

O king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the Devas, Mahiṣa became very angry and ordered the Dānava Tāmra, the destroyer of enemy's pride, to go to the battle-field.

तामस्तु बहुधिः सार्यं समायाल्य रणातिजे ।

शराष्ट्री चकाशगृ ततिह्वानिव सागरे ॥ 51 ॥

Tāmra appeared in the battle, and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on them showers of arrows.

वक्षण: पाणिणुच्य जगाम स्वरितस्तदा ।

यमश्र महिषारूको दर्षदामादाय निर्वर्षी ॥ 52 ॥

Varuna appeared with his Pāśa weapon and Yama, mounted on his buffaio, appeared with his Dāndā (staff).

तत्र युदमभूष्ठौरं देवदानवयोर्षय: ।

बाणीः खद्यौषु मुसलेः शक्तिश्विष्य पर्षधे: ॥ 53 ॥

A terrible fight then ensued between the Devas and Dānavas and the weapons, arrows, axes, Mūsalas, Śaktis and Paraśuṣ guittered in the fields. दर्जकेन निहतसाधो यमहत्नोहोने च ।

न चचाल महाबाहु: संग्रामांगणतस्तदा ॥ 54 ॥

वापमाकृय योगे मुक्लवा तीवार्षिद्वरीमुखान ।

इन्द्रादीनहन्तृष्टा तापसतमिश्रणारिजे ॥ 55 ॥

Yama raising his Dānḍa with his hands struck at Tāmra; but the powerful Tāmra, though severely struck, was not at all moved and remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand, Tāmra, violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra and the other Devas.

Book V Chapter VI

तेपि देवा: शरीद्वैर्दर्दिशितेश शिलाशितः ।

निजनुद्रनवानकुन्द्रांतिरूल तिष्ठेति चुकुशुः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas got angry and shot at the Dānavas multitudes of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently called aloud “Wait, wait.”

निहतसर्ः: सुरैद्वेयो मृष्ठ्रांमाय रणांगणे ।

हाहाकारो महानासीदैत्यसैये भयातुरे ॥ 57 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमदैशीभगवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्चे दैनसैन्यपराजयो

- नाम पड़गोउध्याः 11 5 11

The Dānava Tāmra thus shot at by the arrows of the Devas, fell unconscious in the battle-field; the Dānava forces got afraid and a cry of universal consternation and distress arose.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the defeat of the Dānava forces of Mahisa in the Mahāpurānam Śrimadlevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter VI

CHAPTER VI

On the Deva Dāinava Fight

व्यास उवाच

तापेउध मृचिते दैत्य महिष्यः क्रोधसंयुतः ।

समुधस्य गरांं गुर्वीं देवानुपरणसाग मह ॥ १ ॥

तितंत्वच सुरा: सर्वे इन्यदं गदया किल ।

सर्वे बलिषुजः कामं बलहीनाः सदैव ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! On the Daitya Tāmra becoming unconscious, Mahisa became very angry and, raising his Gādā (club), came up before the Devas and said: "Devas! O Ye powerless like crows; wait; with one stroke of Gadā, I will kill you."

इत्युक्नवाउंगी नगान्हलं समप्राय मद्मार्वितः ।

ज्ञान गद्या तूर्णं बाहुधूले महापुर्षः ॥ ३ ॥

Thus saying, the powerful Mahisa swollen with pride, seeing Indra before him mounted on his elephant, instantly struck him on his arms.

सोप्रि वङ्गण धोगेण विच्छेद्वणु गदां च ताम् ।

प्रहृकौमास्वतीतो जगाम महिंश प्रति ॥ ४ ॥

Indra, again lost no time, and struck violently with his thunderbolt and cut the Dānava's Gādā into pieces, and came up very close, wanting to strike at him.

हयारिति कोपेन खड्गमादाव सुप्रभम् ।

ययचिन्द्र महावीर्वं प्रद्रत्यिज्ञ्वांतिकम् ॥ ५ ॥

Mahisa, too, becoming very angry took up his lustrous sword and came to Indra to attack him with this weapon.

बधूव च त्योयैंदूं वर्षलोकपयावहम् ।

आयुधैर्विंविद्धेस्त्र सुनिविसमयकारकम् ॥ ६ ॥

A fight then occurred between the two, terrible to all the Lokas and wonderful to the Munis, where various weapons were showered from both the sides.

चक्रानु तादा दैवो मायां मोहकर्ता किकल ।

शाभार्थी सर्वतोकन्धी भूनीनामपि मोहितैन् ॥ ७ ॥

The Demon Mahisa spread then his Sāmbhari Māyā, destructive to all the worlds and fascinating to the Munis.

कोटिओ गो महिष्यास्त्र तनुष्यास्त्याकमाः ।

ददृषु: सायुधा: सर्वे निर्णंतो देवाहितीम् ॥ ८ ॥

Hundreds and hundreds of powerful buffalo-like appearances resembling Mahisa became, then, visible on the battle-field; they all began to kill the Deva forces with weapons in their hands.

माथवा विल्यास्तत्र दृष्टवा तां दैत्यविमितिम् ।

बभूपातिनघयोढ़िनो मायां मोहकर्ग किल ।। ९ ।।

वरणोपि सुसंग्रस्तलथेव धन्यानवकः ।

यमो हुताशनः सूर्वः शीतरिणमर्थायतुः ॥ १ ० ॥

Seeing this majic of the Dānava, Indra became thunderstruck and very much confounded with terror. Varuna, Kubera, the Lord of wealth, Yama, Fire, Moon, Sun, and other Devas all fled in terror. Indra then, being surrounded by the network of magic, began to call Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa in his mind.

पलायनयरा: सर्वे बध्धुर्मिहिता: सुरा: ।

ब्रह्मविष्णुमदेशानां स्मरणं चकुकृत्या: ॥ १ १ ॥ ॥

तत्राजमुख काजेशा: सुतमात्रा: सुगोतमा: ।

इसताख्यैवृषाकडाखतुकामा वरायुधा: ॥ 12 ॥

At the instant when they were called in mind, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa riding on respective conveyances Swan, Garuda, and Bull, came up there with best weapons in their hands for Indra's protection.

शीरितां मोहैर्नी दृष्टा सुदर्जनयोज्जलम् ।

मुगोच ततेजसैव माया सा विलयं गता ॥ 13 ॥

Visnu seeing the play of that fascinating magic hurled his bright discus, Sudarśana; and caused the magic to vanish at once.

शैक्ष्य तान्योषसतर सृधिश्वल्प्त्तलिणि: ।

योयुकामः समादाय परिघं समुपाद्रवत् ॥ 14 ॥

Seeing the three, the Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer, the Dānava Mahisa came up there with his Parigha (a club tipped with iron) weapon, desirous to fight with them.

महिषाण्डो महावीरः सेनानीशक्षुरस्तथा ।

उयायश्छीप्रवीर्थ शुद्वुर्वुद्धकामुकाः ॥ 15 ॥

असितेमा जिनेश्वं बाक्लतधक एव च ।

एते चान्ये च बह्वो योद्धकामा विविनेयुः ॥ 16 ॥

Then the general Cikṣura, Ugrāśya, Ugravirya, Asilomā, Trinetra, Vāskala, Andhaka and other warriors came up fight.

सन्द्रध दृतचापासे रथाकडा मदोद्धता: ।

परिवहु: सुगत्सर्वान्यका इव सुवत्सकान् ॥ 17 ॥

Those proud Dānavas, clad in armour and mounted on chariots with bows in their hands besieged the Devas, like a tiger attacking an heifer.

बाणपृष्टि ततश्रकादनिवा मदार्थविताः ।

सुगशापि तथा चकुः परस्परजिधासेवः ॥ 18 ॥

Then those Dānavas swollen with pride began to shower on arrows after arrows; the Devas, too, began to do the same, desiring to extirpate them.

अत्यको हरिसासाघ पत्रबाणापिऊलशितान् ।

मुपोच विषसपिद्धधान्कणीकृष्टामहावलम् ॥ १९ ॥

The General Andhaka, coming up to Hari, drew his bow with great force up to his ear and shot at him five sharp arrows tipped with poison.

वासुदेवोउपसम्प्रापतान्विशिज्ञानगृहीस्तदा ।

चिच्छेदे तानपुनः पड्न मुमोन सिंगुनानः ॥ 20 ॥

Vāsudeva, the Destroyer of the enemies, cut off those arrows no sooner they came up before him; and He shot at the Dānavas five arrows.

तयोः परस्यं सुद्धं बभूव हरिदैत्ययोः ।

बाणासिचकमुसलरोगदाराक्षिपश्धये: ॥ 21 ॥

Then Hari and the Dānava struck each other with various weapons and arrows, disēus, Mūsala, clubs, Śakti, and Paraśu.

महेशोध्यकायोर्दुंदं तुगुर्न लोमहर्भणम् ।

पडाणरिद्नपर्यर्त वधूच च परस्यम् ॥ 22 ॥

Here, on the other hand, the fight lasted for fifty days between Maheśa versus Andhaka; and it was a very close conflict, causing horripilation.

इन्द्रबाष्कलयो तद्धन्सिद्धासुरक्रदयो: ।

यमत्रिजेयोस्तद्नसहहानुधनेशयो: ॥ 23॥

Thus severe fights ensued between Vāskala and Indra, Mahisa and Rudra, Trinetra and Yama, Mahā Hanu and Kubera, Asilomā and Varuna.

असित्मोवकरणायोर्पुंद परमदृतकर्णम् ।

गरुडं गटया दैत्यो जयान हरिवाहनम् ॥ 24 ॥

स गदापातिखाज्ञानै नि:श्रसत्रवित्रहिति ।

शौरितं दक्षिणेनागुं हतेन परिसांत्वयम् ॥ 25 ॥

स्थिरं चकार देवेशेगे वैनंतय महावलम् ।

समाकृष्य धनुः शणई मुगोच विशिष्ठान्बून् ॥ 26 ॥

The Dānava Mahiṣa struck Garudā, the conveyance of Hari, with his club; Garuda, being very much distressed with the blow, sat down, gasping. Viṣṇu then comforted the powerful Garuda, the son of Vinatā and made him calm and quiet.

अत्यंकोपरि कोपेन हनुतकामो जनादनः ।

दायावेपि च तान्वाणांश्छिद्धे स्वर्गे: शितः ॥ 27 ॥

Wanting to kill Andhaka, Janārdana became infuriated, and, drawing his bow made of horn, call Śārṇga, shot at him arrows after arrows.

पडाणिद्वर्दरी कोभाज्ञान च शिलाशिति: ।

वासुदेवोपि नासूनुर्णे वंचविख्या शरोतमान् ॥ 28 ॥

The Dānava cut off all those arrows to pieces

Book V Chapter VI

with his own mass of arrows. Then, becoming very angry, he shot fifty sharp arrows at Hari.

झकं मुगोच बेगेन सहसारं मुडर्गन् ।

त्यन्के सुर्दर्गनं दुरात्स्वचेकम प्यबारयत् ॥ 29 ॥

Vāsudeva quickly made all those arrows useless and hurled Sudarśana Cakra with thousand spokes on the Dānava with great violence.

ननाद च महाराज देवतन्मोहयत्रिव ।

दूध्वा तु विफलं जातं चढ़े देवस्य शाईपुः ॥ 30 ॥

Andhaka thwarted this with his own discus and shouted aloud with such a great force that all the Devas became confused and confounded. Viṣnu's cakra being baffled, the Devas became distressed with grief and the Dānavas got elated.

जम्भु: शोकं सुरा: सर्वे जहरुदैरनावसता ।

वासुदेवोकि रासा दूर्धा देवावछूष्ठा उज्ञान । 31 ।

Seeing the Devas thus grieved, Viṣṇu held alotī his Kaumodaki Gādā (club) and came hurriedly before the Dānava.

गदां कोमोदकीं धृत्वा दानवं सम्पात्रवत् ।

तं ज्ञानातिवेगेन मूर्टिन मायावित्र नहीं: ॥ 32 ॥

स गदाउभितो मूमी निपयातातिमूचितः ।

तं तथा पतितं वीक्ष्य ह्वायरितिकोपानः ॥ 33 ॥

आजगाम यानाथे ज्ञायव्रतिराजितैः ।

वासुदेवीपि तं सुखा समायानं क्रामतिवतम् ॥ 34 ॥

Hari stuck then with his Gādā on the Dānava's head, whereon he fell senseless on the ground. The hot-tempered Mahisa, seeing Andhaka senseless, bellowed aloud and, terrifying Hari, came up there Seeing him there, Vāsudeva made such a thundering noise with his bow string that the Devas became highly glad.

वापस्वानितदं चोर्धे चकार नद्यन्सुरान् ।

शरब्धरि चकारायु भगवान्महिषपरि ॥ 35 ॥

सोप्रि चिच्छेद बाणौधैस्ताऊरानगभरेत्तान ।

तयोरुंद्रमभूरतज्ञयरस्यभगवाहम् ॥ 36 ॥

Then the Bhagavān shot showers of arrows on Mahisa; and Mahīṣa, too, cut those arrows while they were seen in the air. O king! Then a very close fight ensued between the two. Keśava struck on the head of the Dānava with his club.

गदया ताड्यामास केशवो मस्तकोपरि ।

स गदाधिरहो भूर्भि पपानोत्यां सूमूर्हितः ॥ 37 ॥

Thus struck, he fell in a swoon on the ground and a general cry of distress arose amongst the Dānavas.

हाहाकागो महानासीसैन्ये तस्य सुदारणः ।

स विहाय चवधां दैनो मुक्तितुंदितः पुनः ॥ 38 ॥

In a moment the Dānava got up again, free from trouble; he then struck again on Viṣnu's head with his Parigha (a club mounted with iron, a mace).

गृहीत्व परिघं शीर्षं जयान मयुर्मुदनम् ।

परिश्रेणाहत्सेन मुर्जीमप जनदानं: ॥ 39 ॥

Struck by that mace, Janārdana lay senseless; Garuda seeing him thus unconscious, immediately took him away from the battle field.

मृद्धितं तमुबाहाणु जगाम भकडो रणात् ।

परावृते जगत्राधे दे्वा इन्द्रपुरोगमाः ॥ 40 ॥

भयं प्रगुः मुडुःखातांश्रुकृषुश रणात्रों ।

कंदरमानासुरान् वीक्ष्य संकाः: शुलभून्ता ॥ 41 ॥

When Vispu thus fled, Indra and the Devas were much distressed with fear and began to cry aloud. Hearing the Devas cry, Śaṅkara became wrathful and, quickly coming before Mahisa, struck him with his trident (Śūla).

महिषं तत्सास्थेय त्राहरोषसंयुतः ।

सोर्धि शर्फि मुणोचाथ शंकस्योरिसि क्रुद्यम ॥ 42 ॥

The wicked Mahisa made his weapon ineffectual and bellowed aloud as he struck on the breast of Śaṅkara with his Śakti (a kind of missile).

ज्ञर्जे स च वुहात्या वंधविता शिशुलकम् ।

शक्रौरोषि तदा पीक्षां न प्रणोरस तीक्षितः ॥ ४३ ॥

तं ज्ञान श्रिगृतेन कोपादरुगतोचनः ।

संलनं शंकरं दृष्ट्या महिषेश्न दुरात्मा ॥ ४४ ॥

Thus wounded in his breast Śaṅkara diś not feel any pain; rather, with his eyes red with anger, He struck him again with Triśūla. Seeing Śaṅkara engaged with Mañṣa, Hari becoming conscious came again on the battle-fields.

आजगाम दहरितवचकत्वा मुहां प्रहारजाम ।

महिषस्तु तदा वैश्य संग्रगते हरिगंकारे ॥ 4 5 ॥

Śrimaddevithāgavatam

युद्धकामी महावीर्वीं चक्रगुल्धरी वरी ।

कोपयुक्तो बंभावासी दूद्या ती समुयागती ॥ 46 ॥

Seeing the two powerful Deva chiefs, Hari and Hara, in the battle-field Mahisa became very much angry; he then assumed a buffalo body and wagging his big tail to and fro came in front of them with a desire to fight.

जगाम संमुखसतावल्संधामार्थ महापुबः ।

माहिषं वपुरास्थाय धुवन्युच्छं समुकटन ॥ 47 ॥

चकार चैपरं नई आसयवमतरनपि ।

धु-वढ्छंगी महाकायो दाकणो जलदो यथा ॥ 48 ॥

That terrible Mahisa of a huge body shook his horns and bellowed so deep like a thunder cloud that even the Devas got frightened. He began to hurl the huge mountain peaks with his two horns.

भृगभयं पर्पताट्यूढ़ग्रशिक्षेय प्रयामुकटन ।

द्वृता ती तु महावीर्वीं दानवं देहवसनों ॥ ४ ९ ॥

The two powerful Devas Hari and Hara, began to shoot at the Dānava deadly arrows after arrows.

चक्रतुबाणवृष्टि च दानवोपरि दाफाम् ।

कुबाणीय बाणवृष्टि तो दूद्या हरितही हरि: ॥ 50 ॥

Seeing these two gods shower arrows upon him, Mahiṣa began to hurl mountains on them by his tail.

चिवेष प्रिरिश्रंगां तु पुच्छेनावूल्य दाफणम् ।

आपतन्ते प्रिंरि वैश्य भपावान्सावतां पति: ॥ 51 ॥

Visņu cut off those mountains into hundred

pieces by his arrows and struck at him instantly with his Cakra.

विशिष्टोः शताया चेके चक्रेणाणु जयान तम् ।

हरिचक्रान्तः संखेय मूच्छांमाप स दैत्यवर्ध् ॥ 52 ॥

Struck thus by Cakra, the Lord of the Dānavas fainted, but he instantly rose up with a human body.

उतस्थी च क्षणाङ्नं मानुपं वयुराधितः ।

गदायामिमहीघोगे दानवः पर्वतोपयः ॥ 53 ॥

The mountain-like terrible Dānava with a club in his hand frightened the Devas and uttered grave sounds like those of rumbling rain clouds.

मेघवादं ननादोच्यैपरिचयमगनायि ।

तच्छूदा भगवानिष्युः पोचजस्यं समुञ्जलम् ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing that, the Bhagavān Viṣṇu sounded a more terrible sound with his Pañcajanya Śaṅkha (conchshell).

पूरयामास तरसा शब्दं कर्तुं खरस्वम् ।

तेन शब्देन शंख्यय भवमताश्र दानावाः ।

बषव्युप्टिता देवा ऋषयश तपोधनाः ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्ने भटोःशायः ॥ 6 ॥ 11

Hearing the sound of that conchshell, the Dānavas were struck with terror and the ascetic Rṣis and Devas became exalted with joy.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Deva Dānava fight in Śrimadevibhāgavatam the

Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Vedā Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER VII

On the Going of the Devas to Kailāsa

व्यास उवाच

असुतामहिषो भूद्यि विषणपन्नसत्त्वा ।

त्यक्त्वा तन्माहिषह रूपं बचुप मृगगडसी ॥ १ ॥

कृत्वा नादं महापोरं विस्तार्यं च महासटान् ।

घपात सुरसेनायां जासयत्रखदर्शनैः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahiṣa, seeing the Dānavas afflicted with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and spreading his long mains began to roar aloud and fell amidst

the Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails.

मार्डे च नखापातैः कृत्वा कृधिरवितृम् ।

जयान च धुवे लिणुं नख्यापातेन केक्षेरी ॥ ३ ॥

That lion-form Mahisa first attacked so severely the Garuda with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he attacked Vişnu's arms with his nails.

वासुदेवो5पि तं दूधका चकमुध्यय वेगवान् ।

हन्तुकामो हरि: काममवायगु कुश्यान्वितः ॥ 4 ॥

Book V Chapter VII

Seeing the Dānava, Vāsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and attacked him with great force to kill him.

यावद्ध्यरियुं वेगान्चक्रेणाणिबज्ञान तम् ।

तावलोरोतिजलः शुड़ीं शुर्णायां न्यह्नद्धरिण ॥ 5 ॥

Just when Hari struck the Dānava violently with his Cakra, the powerful Dānava quitted immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with his two horns.

वासुदेवो विषाणायां ताडितोरिस विद्धलः ।

पलायवपरो वेणाजजगाम पूर्वनं निजम् ॥ 6 ॥

Vāsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his own abode, Vaikuntha.

गतं दूद्वा हरिं कामं संक्रोरूपि भयान्यन्तः ।

अवध्यं तं परं मत्ता ययी केतामयर्वतम् ॥ 7 ॥

Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, Śaṅkara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Keilāśa mountain with fear.

हद्धारपि च निथ धाम त्वरितः प्रययो भयात् ।

भयावा वज़्मालंब्य तस्थावाजौ महावलः ॥ 8 ॥

Brahmā, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful Vāsava took patience and remained steady in the battle.

वकणः शक्तिमालंब्य धैर्यमालंब्य संस्थितः ।

यभोर्षि दणघमादाय चत: समतत्वरः ॥ 9 ॥

Varuna taking his Sakti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff remained there ready to fight.

ततो यक्षाधियः कामं बधूव रणतयरः ।

पाबकः शक्तिभादाय तताभ्युब्द्रमानसः ॥ 10 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of the Yakṣas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Dānavas; Fire, taking Śakti, also waited.

नक्षत्राधियपितः सुर्यः स्मवेति श्वितावृषी ।

बीक्ष्य तं दानवश्रेष्टे युद्धाय कृतनिश्रशी ॥ १ १ ॥

The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both remained in firm resolve to fight Mahişa, Lord of the Dānavas.

एतमिचलेते कुब्दे देत्यसेन्यं समभ्यगत् ।

विशुजबाणजालानि कृगहिसुशानि च ॥ १ २ ॥

O King! In the meanwhile, the Dānavas forces got angry and attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous serpent-like arrows.

कूला हि महिषं रूपं भृपति: संस्थितस्तदा ।

देवदानवयोधानां निनादस्तमुतोप्रभत् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The Lord of the Dānavas, Mahisa, too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle.

न्याघात्रु ततल्यातो मेघनादसमोर्भभवत् ।

संग्रामे सुमहायोरे देवदानवसेनयोः ॥ १ ४ ॥

At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and Dānavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clippings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder.

श्रुभाध्यां पवतत्वरूपांशिक्षेय पर महावलः ।

जयान सुरसंधांश दानवो महावर्षितः ॥ 15 ॥

The powerful Dānava, then swollen with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces.

सुरापाततैल्वा देवान्युच्छस्य धामणेन च ।

स जयान रूपाधिछा महिषः परमादूतः ॥ 16 ॥

Some by hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahisa, very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death.

तते देवाः सर्पिधर्वा भयमाजमुकझाताः ।

मघवा महिंशे दूद्वा पलायवनरोभवत् ॥ 17 ॥

Then the Devas and Gandharvas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away once on the sight of Mahisa.

संगरं संपरित्यज्ञ नगे श्रेक शचीपती ।

यमो धनाधिः पाशी जमुः सर्वे भयानुतः ॥ 18 ॥

महिषोर्पि जयं मंता जगाम स्यगृहं ततः ।

रेरातं गजं प्राय त्यचार्मिदेश गच्छता ॥ 19 ॥

तवोच्चे:श्वसं भानो: कामधेपुं पश्वस्वीम् ।

स्वरैय-त्मसंतूनर्णे स्वर्ग गन्तुं मनो दो ॥ 20 ॥

Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama,

Kubera, and Varuna all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airāvata elephant and Uccaísravā horse; so Mahiṣa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dānavas considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes.

तस्या देवसदनं गत्वा स महिषासुरः ।

जग्रह सुरारज्यं वै त्यक्तं देदेश्यातुरैः ॥ 21 ॥

Next they wanted to go, as early possible, to the Heavens, with all their forces. In no time Mahisa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof.

इत्रासने तदा रथे दानवः समुपाविष्ठान ।

द्रानवान्स्याययामास देवानां स्थानवेकु सः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other Dānavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.

एवं वर्षेगतं पूर्णं कृत्वा युद्धं सुदारुकाण् ।

जयार्थैप्रदरं कामं दानवो मदार्थिकं: ॥ 23 ॥

Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dānava Mahiṣa, puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object.

निर्जी निर्मिता नाकानेने सर्वेजनीतीझता: ।

एवं बहुिन वर्षाणि बध्मुर्गिरागूरं ॥ 24 ॥

He banished the Devas from the Heaven; the Devas, thus tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years.

श्राता: सर्वे तदा राजनबहाणों शरणं ययुः ।

प्रजापति जगजाधं राजोकर्ण चतुर्मुद्धम् ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced Brahmā, the Creator's refuge.

यद्यासनं वेदभर्भे सेवितं मुनिनिः स्वजैः ।

मतीचिपुप्रषुः शान्तैर्वंदेवतूद्वपारः ॥ 26 ॥

किन्ने: सिद्धान्यवैक्षारणोरागवर्षेः ।

गुरुद्वर्भेधनीताने देवेवंदे जगतुतुम् ॥ 27 ॥

At that instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas

incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marici, etc., with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedāngas; there were also Siddhas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Čāranas, Uragas, and Pannagas, the terrified Devas then began to praise and chant hymns to Brahmā, the Lord of the world.

धातः किमेत्तदिखलातिर्हारांबुजन्म

जन्माधिवीक्ष्य न दया कुरुषे सुगान् यत् ।

सम्पीडितानप्रणजितानसुराधिघने

स्थानच्युतानिरगुरुहाकृतसश्रिवासान् ॥ 28 ॥

The Devas said: “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by the lord of the Dānavas and have been banished from our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales.

पुत्रमिता किमपराधानतेः समेतानंत्यज्य

लोभग्रहितः कुकतेजितुःस्थान् ।

यस्त्वं सुरांतव पदावुज्ञभिन्युक्तानान्

दैत्यादितांध कुपणान् यदुपेक्षसेपेध ॥ 29 ॥

O Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Dānvans, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us!

अमभयुवनारज्य तेन भूक्ते नितानंत

मसूडविरपि योग्य ब्राह्मणीयदाति ।

सुरत्कवरपूर्ण यंसेवतउसी दुरात्मा

जलनिधितिधिभृतां गामयी सेवते ताम ॥ 30 ॥

That wicked Dānava is thoroughly enjoying today the Heaven of the Devas, is forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajñas (sacrifices) from the Brāhmanas; is

Book V Chapter VII

enjoying the Pārijāta tree and also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean.

किं वा गृणीमः सुराकार्यदम्भृतं

ज्ञानासि देवेश सुरारिचेहितम् ।

ज्ञानेन सर्वे त्यमश्रेषकार्यवित्त-

स्मात्यफो ते प्रणातःस्म पादादोः ॥ 31 ॥

What more shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore. O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet.

यशापि कृत्रापि गतान्युग्नासी

नानावरिः: खलु पायमानसः ॥

पीडा कोतेवेच स दृष्ट्येढितैस्त्रातासि

देवेश विधेहि रां विधो ॥ ३२ ॥

That vicious Dānava, of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us.

नो घेढ़यं दावमहातिन्मीवितान:

क शान्तिकतारियन्तेतेजसम् ।

याम: प्रजेशं गरणं सुरेषं

धातारमाद्यं परिभूच्य के शिवम् ॥ 33 ॥

Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more peace giving Governor?

शूनि सुत्वा सुग: सर्वे प्रणेपुन्ते प्रजापतिन् ।

बद्धांशिलपुटा: सर्वे विश्वणवद्वना भूगण् ॥ 34 ॥

तांस्वा पीक्षितान्दृष्टा तदा लोकपितामहः ।

उवाच रलक्षणया वाचा सुखं संजयनप्रिद्धि ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand

Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet words and made them happy.

ब्रह्मोवाच

किं करोमि सुरा: कामं दानवो वरादर्पितः ।

स्वीरयोउसी न पुंवयो विधेयं तक किं पुः न । ३ ६ ॥

Brahmā said: O Suras! What shall I do? The Dānava has become exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male.

प्रजामोउदा सुरा: सर्वे कैलासं पवर्तोनाम् ।

शकूरं पुरतः कृत्वा सर्वक्राविशारादम् ॥ 37 ॥

ततो प्रजाम वैकुंट यत्र देवो जनादनैः ।

मितिलावा देवकायं च विश्रामो विश्रतः ॥ 38 ॥

What remedy is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailāśa, the best of all the mountains; thence we will take Śankara, the expert in doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikuntha, where Visnu, the Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods.

इत्युत्वना हंसभारकु बढ़ा कार्यममूच्चये ।

देवांगे पृथतः कृत्वा कैलासाधिषुखो यदी ॥ 39 ॥

ताविच्छोयोरित तस्मा जाला ध्यानेन पचबम् ।

आगच्छनं सुरैः सार्यं निरनतः स्वगृहाद्विः ॥ 40 ॥

Thus making out the programme, Brahmā riding on his Hamsa went to Kailāśa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time Śiva came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahmā and the other Devas and soon came out of his dwelling abode.

दृष्ट्या परमर्ते तौ तु कृताधिवादनी भृणम् ।

प्रणती च सुरैः सर्वैः सन्तुष्टी संव्यपुन्तः ॥ 4 1 ॥

When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them.

आसानपि पुधवत्या देयेभ्यो मिरित्यपति: ।

उपविष्टि तेयेव निवसादासने स्वके ॥ 42 ॥

Seats were given to the Devas; and when they

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

sat respectively on their Asanas, the Lord of Pārvati also took his own seat.

कृत्वा तु कुशलप्रश्नं बढ़ाणं वृषभध्वजः ।

पग्रष्ठ कारणं देवात-कैलासागमाने विषुः ॥ 43 ॥

Śiva asked the welfare of Brahmā and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailāśa.

शिव उवाच

किम्रागमानं ब्रहान्कृतं देवे: स्वासर्वे: ।

भवता च महाभाग बृहि तत्कारणं किल १ ४ ४ १ ॥

O Brahmā! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.

ब्रहोयाच

महिषेण सुरेशान पीडिता: स्वर्निवासिन: ।

प्रभन्ति गिरिरुंगेषु भयजस्ताः स्वासबाः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Brahmā said: O Deva of the Devas! The Dānava Mahisa is oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra.

यजभुड्महिषो जातस्तशप्रे भूराशयः ।

पीक्षिता लोकपालाश्व त्वायमा शरणं गताः ॥ 46 ॥

Mahīsa and the other Dānavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the Lokapālas, being oppressed have come today and are now taking shelter of Thee.

मया ते भवर्न संभो प्रापिताः कार्यंगीरयात् ।

ययुक्ते तिद्धपल्यदा सुरकायं सुरेश्य ।। 47 ।।

वलिये भारोस्ति सर्वंशी देवानां भृतभावान ।

O Sambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhūta Bīśvana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्विनं शुचा संकर: प्रहसचिद्य। ॥ 48 ॥

वचनं रलक्षणाय वाचा प्रोवाच पघानं प्रति ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Śankara

smiled a little and spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner:

श्रव उवाच

घवतैव कृतं कार्यं वर्यानात्युरा विभो ॥ 49 ॥

अनर्थैं च देवानां किं कत्न्यमतः परम् ।

ईयुगे बल्पाच्यूः सर्वेदेवभयमूदः ॥ 50 ॥

O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahisa and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dānava has become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even.

का समर्थ बरा नारी ते रन्तुं मदर्दर्षिनम् ।

न मे भाषां न ते भाषां संग्रामा नन्तुर्महिति ॥ ५१ ॥

Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that Dānava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle; even if, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight?

गत्वैव ते महाभागो युवुघाते कर्व पुनः ।

इन्द्राणी च महाभागा न युद्धकुशलाति हि ॥ 52 ॥

The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride.

कान्या हनूं सामर्थान्ति ते पाणे मवदर्पिन् ।

ममेदे मतमदीय गत्या देखें जनादेन्म् ॥ 53 ॥

I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Visnu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods.

सूत्या तं देहवाक्याय प्रेत्याम: सुस्तवम् ।

सोस्तिषुद्यमां श्रंशो विष्यु: सर्वांशसाधने ॥ 54 ॥

यिलाला वासुदेवे वै कत्वेलं कार्यवित्नम् ।

प्रपड़ेच च बुद्ध्वा स संविद्यास्यति साधनम् ॥ 55 ॥

Visnu is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our purpose.

व्यास उवाच

इति रूक्षच: शुत्वा ब्ब्याहा: सुरसत्तमा: ।

उपस्थितासते तेथ्युक्त्वा शिवेन सह सत्वा: ॥ 56 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Brahmā and the other

Book V Chapter VIII

Devas heard Rudra and approved heartily and saying, "Be it so" instantly rose up.

स्वकीयविंहनः सर्वे चयुविंथणुर्ग प्रति ।

भुक्ताङ्ठकानन्यूधा कार्यसिद्धिकाराङ्कुमान् । ५७ ।।

At the time, seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards the abode of Viṣṇu.

ववुर्विता: शुभा: शान्ता: सुगन्धा: शुभशंसिन: ।

पहिषण्ड शिवा वास्तस्तोचुः पथि सर्वशेनः ॥ 58 ॥

Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns

of praise and signs of success were seen all along their way.

निर्मलं चाधावक्रौभो विश्राक्ष त्रिवात्तशा ।

गमने तत्र देवानां सर्वं शुभमिवाभवत् ॥ ५९ ॥

श्रिति शीमदैवीयाणवते महापुराणे पद्धस्कन्चे

स्वामोउध्याः ॥ 7 ॥ 11

The sky was clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along their way.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailāsa in the Fifth Book of Śrimaddevi-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter VIII

CHAPTER VIII

On the Description of the Origin and the Form of the Devi

व्यास उवाच

तरसा ते5थ संग्राम्य वैकुंद विद्युवल्पभम् ।

ददुगु: सर्वशोगसहा विद्यगृद्विवारज्ञिन। 1 1 11

सरोवारीसरित्रिक्षा संयुतं सुखदं शुभम् ।

हंससारसचकाढ़ेः कुजार्द्रिक्ष शिवाजिनम् । 2 11

चंयकागोककक्रामन्यारव्यकुलावरे: 1

मल्लकातिलकाप्रातयुतेः कुरबकादिभि: 11 3 11

Vyāsā said: Soon the Devas reached Vaikuntha, protected by Viṣṇu; they at once began to look at the exquisite indescribable beauty of the place. At intervals they saw nice lovely divine houses, shining and appearing very splendid; pools and lakes were seen in front of them beautified with Kalhāra lotus flowers. They began to see, at other places, rivers flowing; swans, cranes, Cakravākas and other aquatic birds were swimming there easily and warbling lovely sounds.

कोकितारावसादोः शिशडेंनूरतिष्ठतः ।

भ्रमरावरम्येश दिव्येकपवनेयुन्ति ॥ ४ ॥

At other places again, beautiful gardens came to their sight adorned exquisitely by Campaka, Asoka, Mandāra, Bakula, Āmrataka, Tilaka, Kurubaka and Mallikā and various other flower trees, the cuckoos were seen cooing melodiously,

bees humming gently and peacocks dancing beautifully.

सुनन्दान्वनाडीध पार्वैर्भक्तित्वरः ।

संसृवाईद्धूर्त भक्तान्यभव्यतिभि: ॥ 5 ॥

प्रासदै तन्तब्धितः काऊनैश्रिभागिष्ठतः ।

अभितिरहैरिजाद्धः संयुतं शुभमसचके: ॥ 6 ॥

There were Viṣṇu's Pārṣadas or attendants, Sunanda, Nandana, and others; they were so much devoted to their master that there hearts never become attached to any other thing; so they were devotedly singing His praises and chanting His hymns with undivided attention. In the centre was situated the golden palace of Hari, towering to heavens, the rooms and quadrangles were all charming; at places, they were bedecked with gems and jewels and adorned with various paintings. There was the Divine Seat in the centre, composed wholly of gems and jewels; and Viṣṇu was occupying this place.

नायाद्रिद्वैरान्यर्वैर्यन्द्रिसरोगणीः ।

राज्ञत क्रिनरै: गश्छत्ककदोनोहैः ॥ ७ ॥

There were dancing the Apsarās (celestial nymphs) and the Devas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras were singing in melodious tunes.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

सुनिभिश्र तथा शान्तैर्वैदपाठकृतादौः ।

सुर्जाद्धः श्रुतिसूर्जेश्ठ मणिडतं सदनं होः ॥ 8 ॥

Those who love the chanting of the Vedas, such calm-tempered Munis were reciting the Vedic Sūktas and thus highly extolled Him.

ते च विद्यगृहं प्राय्य द्वारपाली सृष्णाकृतीं ।

वीधेमोचुर्जनिविजयो हेमयहिष्टयी त्रिचिति ॥ 9 ॥

The two lovely gate-keepers Jaya and Vijaya were waiting at the entrance gate with golden sticks in their hands; the Devas coming nigh the city of Viṣṇu caught sight of them and said:

गतैकी3प्युष्योमीये निवेदयुतं सगतान् ।

द्वारस्यान्वहान्द्वारीनील्याणुदर्सनेलालतान् ॥ 10 ॥

"Any of you may go and inform Viṣṇu that Brahmā, Rudra, and the whole host of gods are waiting at His door to see Him."

व्यास उवाच

विवसन्तुचः शुत्वा गावत्ध विणुपसित्रों ।

सर्वान्समगतान्देवान्पगम्योवाच सत्वर ॥ १ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing their words, Vijaya went away at once to Viṣṇu; and, saluting Him, informed Him of the arrival of the Devas.

विजय उवाच

देवंदेव महाराज रमाकान सुरारिह्न ।

समगातः सुरा: सर्वेत्रारि निष्ठिति वि विषो ॥ 12 ॥

Vijaya said: O Lord! Thou destroyest the enemies of the gods; hence Thou art the most worshipped of them. O Lord of Rama! The whole hosts of gods have come and are waiting at Thy door.

ब्रह्मा रुद्रलयंद्रिक्ष वर्जण: पावको यमः ।

सुर्बनि ने देवावस्यैरल्यामसरा दर्जानिधिनः ॥ १३ ॥

O Bibhu! Brahmā, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire and Yama and other gods, anxious to see Thee, are all praising Thee by proper hymns.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुवा खचनं विद्याप्रिवजस्य सपापति: ।

निर्विगाम गृहानुर्ण सुरान्समिधिकोस्वः ॥ १४ ॥ ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing Vijaya's words, Viṣṇu, the

Lord of Ramā became very anxious and soon went out of his room to see the Devas.

गत्वा बीध्य हर्पिंद्वान्त्रास्थान्युकमक्रिणतान् ।

प्रीतिप्रवाणया वृद्धया प्रीणवामास दुःवितान् ॥ 15 ॥

प्रणेपुले सूरा: सर्वे देवदेवे जनादनम् ।

नुयुद्धुः सुरारिध्ने वारिभर्देविनिश्रितम् ॥ 16 ॥

देवा ऊचुः

देवदेव जगाधाय सृष्टिश्वयन्तकाकर ।

द्वासिस्मो महाराज जाहि नः शरणभगतम् ॥ 17 ॥

Hari came up to them and seeing the Devas waiting at the doors very morose and tired, cheered them up by casting a favourable glance full of affection and love. The gods bowed down and praised hymns to Jagannātha the Deva of the Devas, the enemy of the Daityas and revealed in the Vedas. O Deva of Devas! Thou art the Creator, Preserver, and the Destroyer of the worlds; Thou art the ocean of mercy and the sole refuge of this Universe; O Lord! We have come to Thee as our Great Refuge; therefore dost Thou save us from the present difficulty. Thus praised by the gods,

विष्यान्वाच

विश्नान् निजांना: सर्वें कुर्जानं कवयंतु वः ।

आसमेषु क्रियर्व वै मितितानः समुपानतः ॥ १ १ ॥

Viṣṇu said: O Immortals! Take your respective seats and speak how are you all? Why have you all in a body come here?

चितानुतः कर्व जाता विष्णणा दौन्यानसतः ।

ब्रह्मडेण सहिताः कार्य प्रवृत् सत्वम् ॥ १९ ॥

Why are you so much depressed and worn out with cares? Why do you look so melancholy? Say soon for what purpose you with Brahmā and Rudra have come here.

देवा ऊचुः

महिषेण महाराज पीडिताः पायकर्माण ।

असाध्योनातिदुढेन वरतूदेतने पायिना ॥ 20 ॥

The Devas said: "O Lord! The Asura Mahiṣa is very cruel and wicked; always addicted to vicious acts; now that most sinful Dānava has

Book V Chapter VIII

become very much puffed up with pride and is tormenting us always."

यजभागासी धुंकने बाह्योः प्रतियादितान् ।

अभसा मितिरुर्भु घमन्ति च भयानुतः ॥ 21 ॥

What more shall we say than this, he is appropriating to himself the share of the Yajñas performed by the Brāhmins; we are, therefore, terror-stricken and are wandering in mountains and fastnesses.

वरतूनेन धातुः स दुर्जयो मधुसूदन ।

तमाच्चां राणेंण प्राणा ज्ञाला तत्कार्योपरिब्य ॥ 22 ॥

O Destroyer of Madhu! He has become unconquerable due to his being granted the boon; considering, therefore, the gravity of our situation we have taken refuge unto Thee.

समर्पेसि समुद्रुतै दैत्यमायाविशारत ।

कुक कृष्ण कथोपायां तस्य दानवमदाने ॥ 23 ॥

O Kṛṣṇa! Thou art acquainted with all the tricks and Māyā of the Daityas; therefore Thou art capable to kill them.

धाता तसै वरी दते ह्वायधोत्रिस नरै: कित ।

का कृती लेवेथिति बाला या ह्यन्ता गर्भे एने ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore Thou alone art able to deliver us from the present difficulty; be pleased, therefore; to devise means for that purpose. The Creator Brahmā has granted him this boon that the demon could not be killed by any man; therefore we are asking you where can we get a female who will be able to kill that hypocrite in battle.

उमा मा वा जयी विदा का समर्थन्य धानते ।

महिष्यसातिदुर्ध्य  वरतदानकलादपि ॥ 25 ॥

Mahīsa has turned out very wicked on the strength of that boon; say, therefore, who amongst Umā, Laksmī, Śacī, or Vidyā or any other woman will be able to kill him.

विधिन्य बुद्धा यत्सर्वे मरणमायाय कारणम् ।

कुरु कार्य च देवानां भक्तवलस्त पृधार ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore, O Gracious One to faithful worshippers and attendants! Thou art the Preserver of this world; now devise specially the cause of his death and carry out the purpose of the gods."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुत्वा तद्वचनं विध्यास्नानुवाच हसचित्व ।

युद्धं कृतं पुरास्माथिसतथापि न पृते होसी ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Viṣṇu, on hearing their words, spoke smiling “we fought before; but this Asura could not at that time be killed.

अष्ट सर्वसुगणां वे तेजोपी रूपसमयदा ।

उत्पत्रा चेहतुरोहा सा द्यन्ता एगे वन्ता ॥ 28 ॥

Hence if some beautiful female Deity be now created out of the collective energy and form of the Śaktis of each of the Devas, then that Lady would be able easily to destroy that Demon by sheer force.

ह्यारि वरतूनं च मायाशतविशगदम् ।

हन्तु योग्या भवेत्रागी सक्योर्गेनिंर्मिता हि नः ॥ 29 ॥

The Lady Deity then sprung from the collective energy of ours, would at once be able to destroy that Mahisa, elated on his getting the power, though he is skilled in hundreds of Māyās (magics).

प्रार्थिन्तु च तेजौगान्यवीयेरमाकं तथा पुनः ।

उत्पर्शैतेक्षे तेजौगैरेजेजारीर्षभवैशया ॥ ३० ॥

आयुधानि वयं द्वा: सर्वं म्हडुपोगमाः ।

तस्यैं सर्वांणि दिव्यानि विगुतावीति याचि ॥ ३१ ॥

Therefore ask ye now all, with your wives respectively, boons from that portion which resides in you all in the form of Fiery Energy, that the collected energy thus manifested may assume the from of a Lady. We will then offer unto Her, all the Divine weapons, the tridents, etc., that belong to us.

सर्वायुधधरा नारी सर्वतेज:सम्यित्ता ।

हनिष्यति दुरान्यानं ते पार्थ मदार्थविंन्म ।। ३२ ॥

That Deity, then, full of energy and with all the weapons in Her hands would kill that wicked Demon, vicious and swelled with vanity.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तविति देवेशे बढ़ाणो बदनाततः ।

स्वयमेवोद्धपी तेजोराशिष्ठातील दुःसहः ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: On Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Devas, saying thus, came out spontaneously, at once, of the face of Brahmā, the brilliant fiery energy, very difficult to conceive.

त्क्तवर्णं शुभाकां पदारागमिणिपुम् ।

किंघिष्ठतीततवाणेणं मरिफाजलमिफितृदान् ॥ 34 ॥

That energy looked red like gems and pearls, hot, at the same time, a little cool, having a beautiful form, and encircled by a halo of light.

निःसृतं हरिणा दृष्टं हेण च महात्मना ।

विमित्ती तो महाराज कंप्यतुरुककमो ॥ ३५ ॥

O King! The high-souled Hari and Hara, of mighty valor, were astonished to see this Fire, emitted from Brahmā.

शूक्रस्य शरीगत् नि:सुतं महद्धूतम् ।

तीयवर्णिभूतीजं दुर्दर्ग भटानं म्हत् ॥ ३६ ॥

Next came out of the body of Śankara, His fiery spirit, quite in abundance and very wonderful to behold; it was silvery white, terrible, unbearable, and incapable of being seen even with difficulty.

भयंकरं च दैत्यानां दैत्यानां विस्मयप्रदम् ।

घोरकरं निरिग्रष्टं तमोगुणमिवापरम् ॥ 37 ॥

ततें विश्वगुरीतृ नेजोराशिमिवापगम् ।

नीलं सत्त्वगुणोमेत प्रादुरास महाद्वुति ॥ 38 ॥

It extended like a mountain and looked horrible as if the incarnation of the Tamo Guṇa like another Tamo Guṇa (Śiva is the incarnation of Tamo Guṇa that destroys everything). It was very surprising to the Devas and very fearful to the Daityas. Next a dazzliug light of blue colour emanated from the body of Viṣṇu.

ततश्रैस्त्रशीरानु चित्रकरूपं दुरासदम् ।

आविरासीतुसंवृतं तेजः सर्वेगुणात्मकम् ॥ 39 ॥

The light that came out of the body of Indra was hardly bearable, of a beautiful variegated colour, and comprised in itself the three qualities.

कुर्वयमद्धीनां शरोरिथः: सर्वतः ।

निश्छाकाम महतैजो वक्णस्य तथेच च ॥ 40 ॥

Thus masses of lights came out respectively from Kubera, Yama, Fire and Varuna.

अन्येधो देव देवानां शरीरभेधोस्तिषायम् ।

निरितं तन्महतेजो राशिरासीन्होज्जलः ॥ 41 ॥

तं दृष्टवा विमताः सर्वे देवा विद्यापुर्णोगाः ।

तेजोराशि महाद्विद्धे महापचलमिवापगम् ॥ 42 ॥

The other Devas, too, gave their shares of fiery lights, very lustrous and splendid. Then these all united into a great Mass of Fire and Light. Like another Himālayan mountain shone full their lustrous Divine light; Viṣṇu and the other Devas were all extremely surprised to see this.

पश्चतां तत्र देवानां तेतःपुड्वसमूद्वा ।

बभूवातिवारा नारी सुन्दरी विस्मयपदा ॥ 43 ॥

While the Devas were thus looking steadfastly on that Fire, an exquisitely handsome Lady was born out of it, causing excitement and wonder to all.

विरुगना सा महातलबीः सर्वदेवगरीरा ।

अष्टादशुपत्रा रम्या त्रिवर्गा विश्यामौहिने ॥ 44 ॥

This Lady was Mahā Lakṣmī; composed of the three qualities, of the three colours, beautiful, and fascinating to the universe.

छेतानान कृष्णेनत्र सेरत्धारयपल्ला ।

ताप्यपीलातन कान्ता दिव्यमूषणभूषिता ॥ 45 ॥

Her face was white, eyes were black, her lips were red and the palms of her hands were copper-red. She was adorned with divine ornaments.

अष्टादिषुना देती सहसधुजमण्डिता ।

सम्पृतासुरनायास तेजोराशिसमुद्वा ॥ 46 ॥

The Goddess was now manifest with eighteen hands, though She had a thousand hands (in Her unmanifested state). Now She became manifest out of the mass of fire, for the destruction of the Asuras.

जनमेवय उवाच

कृष्ण देव महाभाग सर्वत्र मुनिस्तम ।

विस्तं बृहि तस्यास्वं शरीरस्य समुद्धम् ॥ 47 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Best of the Munis! O Kṛṣṇa! You are highly fortunate and you are all-knowing. Kindly describe, in detail, the birth of Her body.

एकीभृतं च सर्वेयं तेकः किं वा पृथविस्वलम् ।

अज्ञानि चैव तस्यास्तु सर्वतेजोभयानि च ॥ 48 ॥ ॥

O Deva! Please say whether the energies of all the gods united into one or remained separate? Whether Her body and Her limbs were all luminous.

Book V Chapter VIII

भिवभाणविधानेन जातान्यंशानि यानि तु ।

भुखनासक्षिभेदेन सर्वैकभवानि च ॥ 49 ॥

Was it that Her face, nose, eyes, etc., and all other parts of Her body were created out of the different fires respectively or whether was it that those limbs were fashioned when the different fires blended into one huge mass?

खृष्टि तहित्तरं व्यास शरीग्रभुगुद्वम् ।

वधूव यस्य देवस्य तेजसोड़ं यददुन्ति ॥ 50 ॥

आयुधाभरणादीनि दत्तानि वैयंथा यथा ।

सत्वरं श्रौतकामोप्रिय तव्याद्वंजिनितम् ॥ 51 ॥

Describe, in detail, the origin of the body and the several limbs thereof; also inform me the limbs that were produced out of the corresponding Deva's fiery part; as well tell me the several ornaments and several weapons given by the several Devas respectively. I am very desirous to hear all these from your lotus-like mouth.

न हि तृत्याद्यई बहन-सुधायसर्वे पिचन् ।

चरितं च महातल्य्यास्त्वमुखाधोपजिन:सुतन् ॥ 52 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Hearing from your lotus-like mouth the life and doings of Mahā Lakṣmī, the sweet juice as they are, I am as yet not satiated (and am desirous to hear more).

सूत उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा रात्रः सत्यवतीसुत ।

उवाच मधुरं वावयं प्रीणयाद्वितः भूषितम् ॥ 5 3 ॥

Sūta said: Veda Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, hearing his words addressed him in the following sweet words:

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्महाभाग विस्तरेण इवीमि ने ।

यथामिति कुरक्षेष्ठ तस्या देहसमुद्वम् ॥ 54 ॥

"O Best of Kurus! Very fortunate you are. I will describe in detail, to the best of my understanding, the origin of Her body.

न ब्रह्मा न हरि: साहित्य मूर्तो न च चायसः ।

याथानाथेन तृप्तं वर्फुभीगः कदाचन ॥ 55 ॥

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Mahēśa and Ir.īra are

never competent enough to describe Her form properly.

कर्ष जानाम्यहं देल्या यदुर्ण यायुर्णं चतः ।

वाचारम्पणामांत ततुव्येति ब्रवीमि यत् ॥ 56 ॥

As I already told you that She sprung at the instant the word was spoken, how then can I ascertain the form or likeness of the Devi.

सा निवा सर्वदैवासते देवाकार्यांसिद्धये ।

नानाक्या तेकरका जायते कार्यांगीतात् ॥ 57 ॥

She is constant, She is always existent; though She is one, yet She assumes different forms for the fulfilment of the Deva's ends, whenever their positions become serious.

यथा नटो रंगगती नानाक्पो भवत्यसौ ।

एकल्पव्यभावोशि लोकैरान्वेतेचे ॥ 58 ॥

तथैषा देवकायांधीम्वापरि स्वलीला ।

क्रोतीत बहुकूपणि निरुणा सुगणानि च ॥ 59 ॥

Though the actor is one, yet for the entertainment of the spectators, he assumes different forms in the stage, so the Nirgunā Devi, though formless, assumes in Her pastime, many different forms of Sāttvik, Rājasik or Tāmasik qualities, to fulfill the Deva's purposes.

कार्यकर्मानुसारेण नामानि प्रवर्तिन हि ।

धात्वर्विणुपुक्तानि गौणानि सुबहृद्वपि ॥ 60 ॥

There are various names given to Her, according as the works done by Her vary immensely in their natures, just as the meanings of one root vary, some being principal and some secondary, according to the meanings and objects they convey.

तदै बुद्धानुसारेण प्रबंधीयि नराधिप ।

यथा तेज:सुद्धुभूत रूपं तत्या मनोहतम् ॥ 61 ॥

O King! I will now describe to you, as far as my knowledge goes; the Excellent Form that came out of that mass of Celestial Light.

शुक्रस्य च यतेजसेन तन्मुखपूजम् ।

शुतिचर्षे शुभाकामजावतं महत्तम् ॥ 62 ॥

Her grand beautiful white lotus-like face was created out of the fiery energy of Śaṅkara.

केशातस्यास्त्वासिन्मधाय्यनेतेज्ञापवम् ।

वक्राग्राशितिरीधों वै भेवरणों मनोहरा: ॥ 63 ॥

Śrimaddevatbhāgavatam

Her glossy black beautiful hairs of the head, overhanging to the knees, were formed out of the light of Yama; these all came to a fine pointed end.

नयन्नितियं तस्या जज़े पाचकतेजसा ।

कृष्णा रन्के तथा श्रेते वर्णत्रयविष्यिष्मि ॥ 64 ॥

Her three eyes came out of the energy of Fire; the pupils of those eyes were of a black colour; the middle parts were of a white colour and the ends were red.

वके सिचो कृष्णवर्णे संन्यायेलेलजा घुबो ।

जाते देवया: सुतेजस्के कामस्य धनुषीव ते ॥ 65 ॥

The two eyebrows of the Devi were black and came out of the spirit of Sandhyā (twilights); they were nicely curved and were looking spirited, like the bow of the Cupid and they were shedding, as it were cooling rays.

वायोधु तेजसा शस्ती श्रवणौं संवभूवतुः ।

नाति दीर्घों नातिहुस्यो दोताविघ मनोभुचः ॥ 66 ॥

From the light of Vāyu (air), Her two ears were created; they were not very long, nor very short, beautiful like the swinging seat (rocking chair) of the God of Love.

तततुष्यमसाकारा नासिका सुमनोहरा ।

संज्ञात सिन्यधरणों वे धनदस्य च नेसना ॥ 67 ॥

Her nose was fashioned out of the fire of Kubera, the Lord of wealth; it looked like the til flower, glassy and exquisitely charming.

दन्ता: शिखारिणः रूक्षणा: कुन्द्यासदूषा समाः ।

संज्ञान सुभा राजन्जागपर्येन तेजता ॥ 68 ॥ ॥

O King! Her pointed rows of glossy and brilliant teeth, looking like gems, came out of the energy of Dakşa; they looked like the Kunda flowers.

अधश्रातिरात्कोअस्या: संज्ञातोउक्तपतेसा ।

उत्तोहस्तथा रच्यः कार्तिकेयस्य तेसना ॥ 69 ॥

Her lower lip was deep red and it came out of the fire of Aruna (the charioteer of the Sun); Her beautiful upper lip came out of the energy of Kārtika.

अष्टादिपुर्जाकारा बाहवो विधानुतेसना ।

वसूनां तैससंगुल्यो रत्कवर्णास्तधारभव् ॥ 70 ॥

Her eighteen hands came out of the Tejas of Viṣṇu and Her red fingers came out of the Tejas of the Vasus.

सीयेन तेससा जातं सतनयोयुंममुत्तमम् ।

रेट्रेशणास्यास्तधा मयं जांत विवतिसंमुन्तम् ॥ ७ ॥

Her breasts came out of the energy of Soma and Her middle (navel) with three folds was created out of the spirit of Indra.

जंघोरू वकणस्याय तेजसा सम्बध्वतुः ।

त्रितंबः स तु संजातो विपुलत्नेसा भवः ॥ ७ २ ॥

Her thighs and legs were from Varuna and Her spacious loins came out from Earth.

एवं नारी शुभाकाता सरूपा सुस्या भृपाम् ।

समुच्या तथा रात्वसंज्ञाराशिमस्पूद्वा ॥ ७ ३ ॥

तां दृष्ट्वा सुवु सर्वांगी सुदर्ती चाक्लोचनाम् ।

मूदं प्रपु: सुगा: सर्वे महिषेण प्रपीडिताः ॥ ७ ४ ॥

O King! Thus from the various Tejas, contributed by the Devas, that Heavenly Lady came out. Her body and the several parts thereof were beautiful; Her form was incomparably graceful and the voice was exquisitely sonorous and lovely. The Devas, oppressed by Mahisāsura, became overpowered with joy seeing this well decorated Devi, having beautiful eyes and teeth, and charming in all respects.

विष्णुस्त्वाह सुरान्सर्वान्पूषणान्यायुधानि च ।

प्रवच्छुं तृष्णायर्य देहा: सर्वांगी साम्यान् ॥ 75 ॥

स्वायुधेभ्यः समुभाघ तेजोयुक्तानि सत्त्या: ।

समपर्यन्तु सर्वेउघ द्वेये नानायुधानि वे ॥ 76 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रमलक्ये देवय:

स्वरूपोद्वये नागायुभोउद्यायः ।। 8 ।।

Viṣṇu then addressed all the Devas to give all their auspicious ornaments and weapons, He said: "O Devas! Better give, all of you the various arms and weapons, endowed with strength, created out of your own weapons and give them all to day to the Devi.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the origin and the form of the Devi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter IX

CHAPTER IX

On the Worship by the Gods to the Devi

व्यास उवाच

देवा विष्णुवचः श्रृत्वा संर्वे प्रमृदितासन्तव ।

ददुश्ध प्र्यरणान्याणु वस्त्राणि सवायुधानि च ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing Viṣṇu’s words, the Devas became very glad and presented immediately their own weapons, ornaments and clothing.

श्रीरोद्धशंद्र विद्ये रतेके सूक्षे तधाउजरे ।

निर्मलं च तथा हारं प्रीतस्तद्ये सुमाणिदुक्ति ॥ 2 ॥

The Ksīroda (Milk) Occan presented to Her gladly, the well fitted necklace, clear as crystal, and a pair of divine cloths, of a red colour, never becoming old and very fine.

ददौ चुदामणि दिव्यं सुर्योकौटिममुभम् ।

कृष्ण्डले च तथा शुष्के कटकानि भुजेषु वे ॥ ३ ॥

केनूरात्करणान्दियाज्ञानालयिकाज्ञान।

ददौ तसे विश्वकामां प्रसर्जेत्रियमानासः ॥ 4 ।

Vísvakarmā was very much gratified in his heart and presented a divine jewel to be worn in Her diadem or crest, blazing like hundreds of suns; white earrings, bracelets for Her wrist, bracelets for Her upper arm, and other bracelets decked with various gems and jewels and anklets brilliant like gems, of a clear Sun-like lustre, decked with jewels, and tinkling nicely.

नूपुरी सुस्वरी कान्ती निर्मतीं रत्नभूषिति ।

दूदी सूर्यप्रीकाणी लखा तव्ये सुप्रादयोः ॥ 5 ॥

तथा त्रीयकं रयं दूदी तत्वे महापाँवंः ।

अदूलीयकरत्नारि तेजोबलित च सर्वेशः ॥ 6 ॥

The architect of the gods, the ocean of intellect, Visvakarmā gave Her as offerings beautiful ornaments also for the neck, all very beautiful, as well as for the fingers decked with gems and jewels, all shining splendidly.

अत्नापजूँजां मालां शीघाड्यां धामगुभाम।

तथेव वैजवन्ती च वर्णः संप्रथळ्त । ७ ।।

Varuna gave for Her head a garland of lotuses,

never fading away, of such a sweet fragrance as bees constantly hover round them and the Vajjayanti garland for Her breast.

हिमवानय सन्तुषो रत्नानि विवियानि च ।

ददी च गहानं सिंहं कनकाभं मनोहाम् ॥ 8 ॥

The mountain Himalaya gladly offered Her various gems and a beautiful lion, of a golden colour for Her conveyance.

भूर्णीभूषित तिद्वे: सा राज वरा रुषा ।

सिंहाकडा वरारोहा सर्वेलक्षणयेयुत ॥ 9 ॥

Then that beautiful Lady, having all the auspicious signs, wishing welfare to all, and decorated with the divine ornaments began to look grand and splendid, mounted on Her conveyance, the Lion.

विष्यधुकात्मसुचाधा ददावख्ये रथांगकम् ।

सहचारं सुदीर्णं च देवारिगिरासां हन् ॥ 10 ॥

Visnu then created another thousand spoked discus (Cakram) from His own Cakra, capable to take off the head of any Asura, and offered it to Her.

स्वयिगूलातमयुभाथा शड़़ः: शूलमुत्तमम् ।

ददी देखे सुर्गीर्णां कृतेनं भयनाशनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Śaṅkara created another excellent Triśūla from his own Trident, terrible and demon-killing, and offered it to the Devi.

वर्णाधा प्रसतात्या ददी शंखं सपुज्जलम् ।

घोथवन्तं स्वशंखानु सम्यताय सुमतलम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Varuna created another bright conch from his own conch and offered it gladly to the Devi.

हुताशनस्तथा शर्फिं शतन्यीं सुमनोजाम् ।

प्रायच्छतु प्रसत्रात्मा तब्ये दैत्यविनाशिनीम् ॥ 13 ॥

Fire offered Her a weapon named Sātaghni which kills violently the demons, as if that is another god of death.

शुध्धि बाणपूर्णं च चापं चाळ्ठतर्शनम् ।

मात्तो दत्तांसत्ये दुराकर्षं खरस्यम् ॥ 14 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Maruta (wind), the chief of the gods, offered Her a wonderful bow and an arrow case filled with arrows. The bow can be drawn with great difficulty and emits a very harsh sound.

स्वज्जाद्रप्रमुतयाद द्वाद्विऋ3स्तितारुणम् ।

घंटामैरावततृष्णु सुग्ब्वी चातिसुन्द्वाम् ॥ 15 ॥

Indra created another dreadful thunderbolt from his own thunderbolt and gave it at once to the Devi; as well the beautiful sonorous bell that used to hang from the elephant Airāvata.

ददी दण्डे यमः कामं कातदण्डसमुढ़वम् ।

येनानं सर्वभृतानामकरीकाल अगते ॥ 16 ॥

Yama, the God of Death, created another beautiful staff from his own sceptre which takes away when time comes, the life of all beings.

बह्मा कर्मबंर्तु दिव्यं गंगाविरप्रपूर्तिन् ।

ददावस्य मुवायुक्तो कमण: पाणमेव च ॥ 17 ॥

Brahmā gladly gave Her a divine Kamandalu, filled with the Ganges water; and Varuna offered Her a weapon called Pāśa.

काल: खदुरा तथा चर्म प्रावछन्तु नराधिय ।

परगूं विश्वकर्मा च तीक्षामास्टे द्वावव ॥ 18 ॥

O King! Time gave Her an axe and a shield and Viśvakarmā gave Her a sharp Paraśu.

धनदसु सुगपूर्णे पानघांसु सुवर्णम् ।

पृज्ञं वक्षणश्रादोद्वैये चिदयं मनोहम् ॥ 19 ॥

Kubera, the Lord of wealth, gave her a golden drinking cup, filled with wine; and Varuna offered Her a divine beautiful lotus.

गदां कोमोदर्की नत्हा घंटगणनिरनादीम् ।

अदात्तयै प्रस्नात्या सुरगनुविनाशिणीम् ॥ 20 ॥

अक्षापयेनकल्पाणि तावाउभेघं चे उंगनम् ।

ददौ तत्हा जगनाये निजगभीन्दिकाः ॥ 21 ॥

Vísvakarmā became very glad and gave Her the Kaumodakī gadā, capable to kill the enemy of the gods and whence hundreds of bells are hanging, an impenetrable armour and various other weapons. The Sun gave to the Divine Mother his own rays.

सायुधां भूषणैयुक्तो बृद्धता ते विस्ययं गतः ।

गुरुवुस्तां सुरा देवीं तैनेल्व्यमोहैर्नी विगवाम ॥ 22 ॥

The Devas, seeing Her adorned with ornaments and weapons, began to praise and chant hymns to that most Auspicious Goddess, the Great Enchantress of the three worlds.

देवा कबुः

नमः शिवायै कल्याण्ये शास्तै पृष्टे नामेनः ।

भगवल्ये नमो देद्ये क्रतूणये सत्तं नमः ॥ 23 ॥

The Devas said: “Salutation to Śivā, Salutation to the Most Auspicious; Thou art peace and nourishment; we salute again and again to Thee. Salutation to Thee, the Bhagavati Devi; Thou art the Goddess Rudrāni (the terrible), we always salute again and again to Thee.

कालतार्ये तर्वावार्ये इन्हारणे ते ननोमतः ।

मिल्दीं घुब्दीे तथा वृद्धों वैश्याल्ये ते ननोमः ॥ 24 ॥

Thou art the Kālarātri (the night of destruction at the end of the world); Thou art the Indrānī. Thou art the Mother, we salute again and again to Thee; Thou art the success, Thou art the intelligence, Thou art the growth, Thou art the Vaisnavī; salutation again and again to Thee.

पृथिव्यां या शिवता पृथव्यां न ज्ञाता पृथिवी च या ।

अनं:शिवता यमयिति वन्दे तामीक्षीं पराम् ॥ २५ ॥

Thou art within the earth; yet the earth does not know Thee. Thou art again the inmost of the earth and controlled the things within this earth; we offer our salutations to that Supreme Cause, he may have God.

मायायां या श्विता ज्ञाता मायायां न च तमाजाम् ।

अन्त:स्थिता प्रेयति प्रेयित्री नुम: शिवाय् ॥ 26 ॥

Thou art within this Maya (the unborn) yet the Maya does not know Thee. Thou resident again within the innermost of the Maya and directest that Unborn One, the Maya, we salute again and again to that Supreme Cause, the Great Directress, the Siva (the most auspicious).

कल्याणं कुरु भो मातस्ताहि नः श्रुतापितान् ।

जहि पारं द्वाराि त्वं तेजसा स्थेन मोहितम् ॥ 27 ॥

O Mother! Do what is good to us; we are oppressed by our enemy, dost thou protect us; by

Book V Chapter IX

Thy own power dost Thou overpower and kill that Mahisa.

खलं मायाबिनं घोरं क्रीवध्यं वरद्यपिंन् ।

दुःखदं सर्वदैवानां नानारूपधरं शक्न् ॥ 28 ॥

That demon is vulnerable by woman only, he is deceitful, cunning, dreadful, and swollen with pride on his having got the blessing; he assumes many forms and torments the Devas.

त्वमेका सर्वदैवानां शरणं भक्तवत्सले ।

पीडितान्दानवेनाद्य जाहि दैव नमो3तु ते ॥ 29 ॥

O One, devoted to the Bhaktas! Thou art the only refuge of all the gods; O Thou art the supreme goddess, we are very much harassed and oppressed by the Dānava; therefore dost Thou now protect us; we bow down to Thee.

व्यास उवाच

एवं सृत्ता तदा देवी सुरैः सर्वसुखादया ।

तानुवाच माठदौषी सिमातूर्वे शुभं चवः ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: When the Devas had praised thus, the Highest Goddess, the Giver of all happiness, then smilingly said in the following auspicious terms:

देव्युवाच

भयं त्वजुत् गीर्वाणा महिषामन्दोचेतसः ।

हनिष्यामि रणोईव वरतून विमोहितम् ॥ 31 ॥

“O Devas! Today in the battle group I will overpower what wicked Mahisa, of cruel disposition and take away his life.”

व्यम उवाच

इत्युक्लवा सा सुरान्देवी जहासातीव सुस्यम् ।

चिचमेतच्च संसारे घममोहतुर्जत जन्त । ३२ । ॥

Vyāsa said: Speaking thus in a melodious voice, the Supreme One smiled and again said: "Thus world is all full of error and delusion.

ब्रहाविष्यामुळेशादा: सैराङ्ठाये सुगतस्तथा ।

कमययुक्ता भयवस्ता वर्तन्ते महिषात्कल ॥ 33 ॥

Really, it is very wonderful that Brahma, Vispu Maheśa, Indra and other gods are all shuddering out of fear from Mahisa Dānava.

अहो दैवबलं घोरं दुर्जंय सुरस्तम्भः ।

कालः कतप्रस्ति दुःखानां सुखानां प्रभुशिः : ॥ 34 ॥

The power of Destiny is exceedingly great and terrible; its influence cannot be overcome even by the best of the Devas.

सृष्टिपालनसंहिते समर्था अपि ते यदा ।

मुह्यिति कलेशसन्तमा महिषेण प्रपीक्षिति: ॥ 35 ॥

O king! The Time is the Lord of happiness and pain; Time is, therefore, the God. The wonder is this that even those who can create, preserve and destroy this world, they are being overpowered and tormented by Mahiṣa.

इति कृत्वा सितं देवी साउटुहासं चकार ह ।

उच्छे: शब्दे महापोरं दानवानां भपप्रदम् ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi, thinking thus, smiled; then laughed and laughed very hoarsely; it seemed that a roar of laughter then arose.

चक्रमे वसुभा तत्र श्रुत्वा तलळ्यद्धानुम् ।

चेलुध शवतो: सर्वे चुक्षोपाधिश्र श्रीवयान् ॥ 37 ॥

And the Dānavas were struck with terror at that very dreadful sound. The earth trembled at that extraordinary sound; the mountains began to move and the vast oceans that remained calm began to be agitated with billows.

मेक्रश्याला शब्देन दिशः सर्वा: प्रपृत्तिनः ।

घयं जमुस्ताद शुवा टानवास्तत्वयं महत ॥ 38 ॥

The uproar filled all the quarters and the mountain Meru trembled. Then the Dānavas, hearing the tumultuous uproar, were all filled with tremendous fear.

जय पाहिति देवात्सापुचः परमहर्षितः ।

महिषोपि स्वयं शूला चुकोय पदार्तिः ॥ ३१ ॥

The Devas became very glad and said thus: "O Devi! Let victory be Yours; save us. The intoxicated Mahisa, too, hearing those words, became very angry.

किमेत्तिति तन्दीत्यायप्रछ स्वनाशिकृतः ।

गच्छन्तु वारिता दूता ज्ञानु शब्दसमुद्वय् ॥ 40 ॥

Mahisa, struck with terror at those words, asked the Daityas “O Messengers! Go and ascertain how has originated this sound.

कृतः केनायमत्युः शब्दः करण्यायकाः ।

देवो वा दानवो वापि यो घबेत्ववनाकाः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Who has made this harsh sound? Bring that devil who has made this hoarse noise, be he a Deva, Dānava, or anyone else unto me, and I will kill that roaring villain, who, it seems, has been puffed with egoism and vanity.

गृहीता तं दुगात्मानं मत्सीपं नर्यत्थत् ॥

ह्निष्यामि दुराचारं गर्जन्तं सम्यदुमंदम् ॥ 42 ॥

The Devas are not making this noise, for they are vanquished and terror-stricken; The Asuras are not doing so, for they are my subjects; then, who is the stupid fellow that has done so?

क्षीणायुयं मन्दमर्ति नवामि यमसादनम् ।

पराजिता: सुरा: कामं न गर्जित भवानुग: ॥ 43 ॥

Surely he is of very little understanding; his days are numbered; and I will carry him to the home of Death.

नासुरा मम वश्यासते कमयेदं मुद्धरेष्टितम् ।

त्विता मामुपायातु जात्वा शब्दस्य कारणम् ॥ 44 ॥

अहं गत्वा हनिययामि तं पायं वित्तवश्रमम् ।

Go you, ascertain the cause of sound and come back to me; then I will go there and destroy that wretch who made this noise to no purpose.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तास्तेन ते दुता देर्वी सर्वांकुष्यदीयम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

अष्टादिषुर्जा दिव्यां सर्वांभरणभूरिताम ।

सर्वलक्षणास्यम्बों वरायुध्यरां रुभाम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

द्यर्तीं चरकं हरले पिबन्ती च मुहुभेंम् ।

Vyāsa said: No sooner the messengers heard these words of Mahiṣa, than they at once went to the Devi and saw that Her body and the several parts thereof were all very beautiful; She had eighteen hands, She was decorated completely with various ornaments all over Her body, all the auspicious signs were being seen in Her body and that She was holding excellent divine weapons. That auspicious Goddess beautiful, was holding in Her hands, the cup and drinking wine again and again.

संवैध्य भयभीताते जमुक्तसा: सुर्णिकता: ॥ 47 ॥

सकाशं महिष्यायु तमयु: स्वनकारणम् ।

Beholding Her this form, they were afraid and fled at once to the Mahisa and informed him the cause of that sound.

दूत ऊयु:

देवी दैनेश्व श्रंड दूण्यते कार्विदंगना ॥ 4 8 ॥

सर्वोईभूषण नारी सर्वत्लोषणीघात ।

न मानुषी नासुरी सा दिव्यस्पा मनोहता ॥ 49 ॥

The passengers said: “O Lord! We have seen one grown up woman; whose whereabouts we are quite ignorant. The Devi is decorated with jewels and ornaments all over Her body; She is not human nor Asurit but Her form is extraordinary and beautiful.

सिंहासूकडेपुथाप्रा चाहार्यकार वरा ।

सा नादं कुकते नारी लक्ष्ये मदार्थिति ॥ 50 ॥

सुरापानरता कामं जानीमो न सम्भृतं ।

अन्तरिक्षिता देवासां सुवर्ति मुदाविता: ॥ 51 ॥

That noble Lady is mounted on a lion, holding weapons on all Her eighteen hands and is roaring loudly; She is drinking wine; so it seems that She is puffed up with liquor. It is quite certain that She has no husband.

जयेति पाहि नक्षिति जहि शत्रुमिति प्रभो ।

न जाने का वरोगोहा कव या सा परिश्रहः ॥ 52 ॥

किमर्थमाता चात्र किं विधकीपिति सुन्दरी ।

The Devas are gladly chanting praises from the celestial space that Let Victory be to Her side and that She save the Devas, O Lord! We don't know at all who is that handsome woman? or whose wife is she; why has she come there? and what is Her motive?

उलुं नैव समर्षा: समस्ततेज: परिधर्षिति: ॥ 53 ॥

भूगारवीतासाभिका रौत्रादुतरासाधिता ।

Sentiments of love, heroism, laughter, terror and wonder are all fully shining in Her; therefore we are very much overpowered by the halo emitted from Her; and we could not even see Her well.

Note: Rasas means sentiments. The rasas are usually eight. Śrīngāra, Hāṣya, Karunā, Raudra, Vira,

Book V Chapter IX

Bhayānakab, Bibhatsādbhū tasangān, Cetyaṣṭau, Natyan, Rasab smṛtab but sometimes Śāntarasa, is added thus making the total number nine; sometimes a tenth, Vatsalyarasa is also added.

दृष्टिवैंविधो नारीमममाथ्य समागतः ॥ 5 4 ॥

वयं त्वदान्ना राजन्कि कर्तव्यमतः परम् ।

O King! In compliance with your order, we have come back to you no sooner we had seen the Lady, without even addressing Her in any way. Now order us what we are to do.

महिष उवाच

गच्छ चीर मावाहिष्टी मन्न्रश्रेशु कलावित्वः ॥ 55 ॥

सामादिसभगवैत्सवं समानव शुभाननाम् ।

नवाति यदि या नारी तिथि: सामादिपिबित्व ॥ 56 ॥

अहत्वा तां वशरोहां त्वामानय मपातितकम् ।

कर्मणि यदुगहिंगी तां मारलभुवं मुदा ॥ 57 ॥

Mahisā said: “O Best of ministers! O Hero! Under my command, go there with all the forces and use the means, conciliation, etc., and bring that woman, having a beautiful face (like the Moon), to me. If that Lady do not come even when the three policies, Sāma (conciliation), Dāna (making gifts), and Bheda (sowing dissensions in an enemy’s party and thus winning him over to one’s side, one of the four Upāyas or means of success against an enemy) are adopted by you, then apply the last resort Dāna, (or war) in such a way that Her life be not destroyed and bring that beautiful woman to me. I will gladly make Her, of black curling hairs, my queen-consort.

प्रीतिपुत्ता समायाति यदा सा मुगलोचना ।

रसभंगो यथा न स्थताया कुक मेमोपैतम् ॥ 58 ॥

श्रवणान्मोहितोरम्यद्य तत्या कल्पस्य सम्पत् ।

In case that deer-eyed one comes gladly, then do my desires without causing any unpleasant feeling; (a cessation of sentiment). I am enchanted on hearing about Her beauties and wealth.

व्यास उवाच

महिषय स्व च: शुत्वा पेगलं मन्थिसतम: ॥ 59 ॥

जगाम तरसा कामं गजाश्रधस्येतुः ।

Vyāsa said: The prime minister, on hearing the words of Mahisa, took with him elephants, horses, and chariots and hurriedly went to the desired place.

गत्वा दुर्तर्ग स्थत्वा तामुवाच मनस्विनीम् ॥ 60 ॥

विवयावन्तः रलक्षणं मन्त्री मधुरया गिरा ।

On coming near to the Devi, the minister began to address Her in sweet words from a sufficient distance in a very humble and courteous way.

प्रधान उवाच

कांसि तवं मधुरतावे किमजागमं कृतम् ॥ 6 1 ॥

पृष्ठति तां महाभागे मन्युवेन मम प्रधुः ।

स ज्ञाते सर्वदैवानामवध्यन्तु नौः किल ॥ 6 2 ॥

O Sweet speaking! Who art Thou? What has caused Thee to come here? O Highly fortunate! My master has asked through me these questions. My master cannot be killed by all the Devas and men; he has conquered all the Lokas (worlds).

बहाणो बरादोने गर्वितशुकालोचने ।

दैत्येश्वीरोंजी बलवात्कामरूपधर: सदा ॥ 63 ॥

श्रुत्वा तांं समुपायानांं चाक्चेयं मनोहमाः।

प्रधुमिच्छति राजा मे महीचो नाम पार्थिवः ॥ 64 ॥

मानुर्ष रूपभादाय त्वत्सीपं समेध्यति ।

O Beautiful-eyed! On account of getting his boon from Brahmā, the Lord of the Daityas has become very powerful; and consequently being very proud, assumes different forms at will. He, our King-Emperor Mahisa, the lord of the earth hearing about Thy beauty and dress, has expressed a desire to see Thee. O Beautiful one! Whether he will appear before Thee in a human form?

यथा कष्टेत चार्विङ्ग तथा नयामहे वयम् ॥ 65 ॥

तहिंहि मृगशगवांसि समीपं तस्य धीमतः ।

He will do whatever Thou likest. O Deer-eyed One! Be pleased now to go to that intelligent King. In case Thou dost not go, we will bring the King, Thy devotee, to Thee.

नो चैहिद्वानयद्येने राजानं भफित्तलयम् ॥ 66 ॥

तथा कशोम विशेष यथा ने मनसोयितम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>वशणोउसी ततात्यर्थ कृपसंश्वरणान्ति १ 6 7 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>क्रमोफे वदागु त्वं संविधेयं मया तथा ॥ 6 8 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो वैवीमाहात्ये</td></tr><tr><td>नवमोउध्याः 11 9 11</td></tr></table>

O Lord of the Devas! Our King has heard of Thy beauty and grandeur and has become very much submissive to Thee. We will therefore do exactly what Thou desirest. Therefore, O Thou

having thighs thick and round like those of a young of an elephant! Be pleased to express what Thou likest and we will do quickly as Thou desirest.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the worship offered by the gods to the Devi and the weapons offered by them in the Mahā Purānam,

Śrimaddevibhayatarat of Vas, 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER X

On the Messenger's News to Mahiṣa

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा ग्रहस्य प्रमदोत्तमा ।

तमुवाच महाताजे मेघामार्थीर्या गिरा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The Māyā, that Excellent Lady, hearing thus the words of the prime minister of Mahisa, laughed and spoke with a voice, deep like that of a cloud, thus:

देव्यवाच

मत्थवर्षे सुराणां वै जननीं विविड्मां मां किल ।

महालक्ष्मीमिति ख्यातां सर्वैत्यनिपृष्टिनीम् ॥ २ ॥

“O Minister-in-chief! Know Me as the Mother of the gods; my name is Mahā Laksmī. It is I that destroy all the Daityas.

प्राधितानई सुरैः सर्वेर्मधिस्य वधाय च ।

पीक्षितैर्वर्णनवेत्रेण यज्भागवहिष्ठकृतेः ॥ ३ ॥

I am requested by all the Devas to kill the Dānava Mahisa; they have been oppressed and deprived of their share of Yajña offerings.

तस्मादितागतास्म्यघ तद्धार्थ कृतोष्णा ।

एकाकिकी न तै-येनो वंसुता मन्सिसमा ॥ 4 ॥

यच्चवार्डं साम्यवृं कृत्वा स्वागतमादात् ।

उक्ता मधुरया वाचा तेन तुहासमि तेनच ॥ 5 ॥

Therefore I have come here today alone, without any army, to take away his life. O Good One! I am pleased with your sweet words of welcome, in showing me marks of respect.

नोदेब्द्विम मृथा त्वां वे कालात्पिनसमया किल ।

कस्य प्रीतिकरं न स्यानाम्युवैवचनं खलु ॥ 6 ॥

Had you not behaved thus, I would have certainly burnt you to ashes by my fiery sight, which is the universal conflagration at the break up of the world. O Minister! Who is there that gets not pleased with sweet words!

गछ्त तं महिषं पारं वद मढ़चानादिदम् ।

गछ्त पातालमयुना जीवितेछा यदास्ति ते ॥ 7 ॥

Go you to Mahisa and speak to him the following words of mine: "O Villain! Go down to Pātāla (the nether regions) at once if you have any desire to live.

नोचेकृतागसं उदुं हनिष्यामि रणाङ्गो ।

मद्राणधृष्णपोहरूर्न नगतार्सि यमसादनम् ॥ 8 ॥

Otherwise, I will slay you, the wicked one, in the battle-field; you will have to go to the house of Death, pierced by my mass of arrows.

दयालुत्वं ममेदं त्वं विदित्वा गछ्छ सत्यम् ।

हते त्वयि सुरा मुह स्वर्गी प्राप्यक्ति सत्यम् ॥ 9 ॥

तस्माद्छस्य त्वलतेको मेढ़िणी च समागम् ।

पातालं तरसा मन्द यावद्धाना ने भेउपन्त् ॥ 10 ॥

O Stupid One! Know that this is merely kindness shown unto you, that I have told you to go soon to Pātāla and that the Devas get possession of their Heaven, with no delay, “O One of weak intellect! Therefore dost Thou leave possession of this sea girl earth and go alone without any delay to Pātāla, before my arrows are shot at you.

युद्धेच्छा चेन्मनसि ते नहोहि चलितोसुर।

वौरैर्हबालै: सर्वैन्यायी यमसादनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Book V Chapter X

O Asura! Or if you desire to fight, then come at once with your powerful warriors; I will destroy all of them.

युगे युगे महामूद हतास्त्वसूशा: किल।

असंख्यातास्तथा त्वाँ वे हनिव्यायि पराणोंने ॥ 12 ॥

O One of dull intellect! I will kill you in battle, just as I killed before in yugas after yugas countless Asuras like you.

साक्ष्यं कुक श्रशाणं धारणे तु श्रभोट्यथा ।

तद्धुद्वस्य मया सार्थं समरे स्मरीक्ति: ॥ 13 ॥

O Passionate creature! Better shew that your efforts in holding weapons have been crowned with success by your being engaged in battle against Me; otherwise they will all be useless.

मा गर्व कुक दुहामन् यन्येजित ब्रहणो वरः ।

सीकाय्यले तथा मूढ़ पीक्षिता: सुरसामना: ॥ 14 ॥

O Stupid! You thought that you would be vulnerable alone to women hence you oppressed the Devas entitled to worship; O wicked one! No longer show your pride on the strength of your getting the boon from Brahmā, that you would be vulnerable only to the females.

कर्तेब्ये चर्चनं धातुस्तेनाहं त्वामुपागता ।

श्रीरूपमतुलं कृत्वा सत्यं हन्तुं कृतगामस् ॥ 15 ॥

यथेच्छं गच्छ वा मुंद पातालं पत्रमावृतम् ।

हिला भूसुसद्धाद्य जीवितेच्छा यदास्ति ते ॥ 16 ॥

Thinking it advisable to observe the words of the Creator, I have assumed this incomparable Eternal Female appearance and I have come here to slay you, O wicked one! O stupid one! If you have any desire for your life, then quit this Heaven and go to Pātāla, infested with snakes, or anywhere else you like.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः स तातो देल्य मन्निश्रेष्ठो वर्तानितः ।

प्रत्युवाच निशण्यासी वचनं हेतुर्गर्भितम् ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of the Devi, that minister, surrounded by forces replied in reasonable words thus:

देवि क्षीसरूर्ण वाक्यं बूँपे त्वं मदगार्विता ।

कवासी वक्त त्वं कंये युद्रमर्शेण्यविद्धि कित १ १ १ ॥

एकाकिनी पुनर्वालिंग प्रायध्यवीवन मुचु: ।

महिषोस्ती महाकायो दुर्विभाव्यं हिं संगरम् ॥ १९ ॥

"O Devi! You are speaking in words befitting a woman and puffed up with pride. You are a woman; the lord of the Daityas is a hero; how can a battle be engaged between you two. It seems to me impossible. Your body is delicate, a girl in full youth; especially you are alone and Mahisa is of huge body and powerful; so the fight comes next to impossibility.

सैन्यं बहुविधं तस्य हस्तयश्रयसंकुलम् ।

पदातिणगर्भविद्धं नाना उद्युविराजजन् ॥ 20 ॥

कः. अम करिराजस्य मालतीपुथमदर्दे ।

मारणे तव वामोक महिषस्य तथा रणे ॥ 21 ॥

He has elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, etc., and countless soldiers all armed with weapons. Therefore, O Beautiful One! He will find no difficulty in killing you in battle as an elephant finds no difficulty in treading over the Mālati flowers.

यदि त्वा परभं वाक्यं ब्वीमि यवल्यमादून ।

शूगारे तिड़कूदे हि रसभूज्ञाद्धिभ्यमूँ ॥ 22 ॥

Rather, if I utter anything harsh to you, that would go against the sentiment of love with you; therefore I cannot speak rudely to you out of my fear not to interrupt the above feeling.

राजप्रेमाके सुरपिटुर्षतैत त्वयि भक्तिमान् ।

साममेव मया वाच्छं दानयुक्ते त्वा वचः ॥ 23 ॥

True, that our king is enemy of the gods; but he has become extremely devoted to you. Therefore it is wise to speak words full of conciliation or generosity.

नोचेद्वन्दमहादेव खाणेन त्वां मुचावदाम् ।

सिध्यास्थिमानचतुरां रूपदयीवनगर्वितम् ॥ 24 ॥

Were it otherwise. I would have shot arrows at you and would have killed you in as much as you have thus boasted in vain and spoken so dire a falsehood, resting merely on the strength of your youthful pride and cleverness.

स्वामी मे मोहितः श्रुत्वा रूपं ते धुवनातिभम् ।

तनिग्रामर्थि प्रियं कामां चकच्छ्यं त्वयि यन्यम् ॥ 2 5 ॥

राज्यं तत धरने वर्द सदासमे महिषः क्रिकल ।

कुक भावं विशालात्रिक्य त्वक्ना रोषं भूतिप्रदम् ॥ 2 6 ॥

My master has become fascinated on hearing your extraordinary beauty hardly to be seen in this world; it therefore behoves me to speak sweet words to you for the sake of pleasing my master. O Large-eyed! This kingdom and the wealth thereof are all yours; in fact, Mahisa will be your obedient servant; therefore, better forsake your anger, leading to your death; and cultivate friendship with him.

पतापि पाद्योलोर्डं चक्तिभावेन भामिनि ।

पुत्गाती महागतो भव शीघं शुचित्मिते ॥ 27 ॥

O Sweet Smiling One! I am falling at your feet; you better go to him and become at once his quenconsort.

त्रैलोक्यविघर्व सर्वे प्राय्यसि त्वमनाविलम् ।

सुखं संसारजं सर्वे महिष्यय परिश्रहान् ॥ 28 ॥

O Handsome Woman! No sooner you become the queen of Mahisa than you will get at once all the pure wealth of the three worlds and the unbounding happiness of this world.

देव्यवाच

शृणु मन्न्यव्ययामि वाक्यानां सारमुत्तमम् ।

शाखदुईने माणीं चातुर्मैननुंचित्य च ॥ 29 ॥

The Devi said: “Minister! I now speak what is pregnant with goodness and wisdom to you, according to the rules of the Śāstras, keeping in view also the cleverness that you have shown in using your words.

महिष्य प्रधानस्वं मया ज्ञातं त्रिया किल ।

पगुबुद्धिर्बभावो.सि ववनातल संग्रतम् ॥ 30 ॥

मनिजानस्वानुशा यस्य स कर्वं बुद्धिमाभ्यन्ते ।

Now I come to understand from your talk, that you are the chief secretary of Mahisa; and therefore your nature and intelligence are like those of a beast. And how can he be intelligent, whose ministership is occupied by a man of your nature!

उभयो: सरुगो योगः कृतोरयं विधिना किल ॥ 31 ॥

यदुक्ते कृसीव्यावासिर्स निद्वाराय मूद किम ।

पुभात्राई तत्सवाघावासं भयं क्रीवेधधारिणी ॥ 32 ॥

Nature has ordained connection between two persons of like nature. O Stupid One! Did you think a little beforehand the meaning of your words when you told me of my feminine nature? Though I am not apparently a man, yet my nature is that of the Highest Puruṣa (Man); I shew myself simply in a feminine form.

याचितं मरणं पूर्व तिच्या तत्प्रभृणा यथा ।

तस्मामन्ये3तिमुखों3सौ न वीरासितमः ॥ 33 ॥

Your master asked before from Brahmā that he would prefer death, if possible, at the hands of a woman; therefore, I consider him quite illiterate and ignorant of the sentiment, worthy of a hero.

कामिन्या मरणं कर्तीबारितरं शूरदुःखदम् ।

प्रार्थितं प्रभुणा तेन महिषेणातम्बुद्धिना ॥ 34 ॥

Because to die at the hands of a woman is very painful to one who is a hero; and this is gladly welcome to one who is a hermaphrodite.

तस्माल्डीक्रपादाधाय कार्यं कर्तुयुपाता ।

क्रवं विषयेच त्वद्वावैधंमीशाखविरोधकः ॥ 35 ॥

Now see that your master Mahisa has shown his intelligence, when he courted his death from the hands of a woman. For that very reason, I have come here in the shape of a woman to effect my purpose; why shall I fear, then, to hear your words, contradictory to those of the Śāstras.

विरपरितं यदा दैवं तृणं बजुसमं भवेत् ।

विधिधोत्पुरुः कामं कृलिंगं तृलवत्ता ॥ 36 ॥

When Fate goes against any one, a grass comes like a thunderbolt; and when fate goes in favour of anyone, a thunderbolt becomes a soft as a bundle of cotton.

कि सै-योगयुध: कि वा प्रपड़ेरुंगसेवनै: ।

मरणं सांगृतं यस्य तस्य सै-यैसृतु किं फलम् ॥ 37 ॥

What does it avail even when one possesses an extensive army or various weapons in abundance, taking shelter in a wide extending fort? What will

Book V Chapter X

his soldiers do to him, whose death has come close at hand?

यतउयं देहस्पबन्धो जीवस्य कालयोगतः ।

तदेव लिखितं सर्वे सुखं कुःखं तथा मृति: ॥ 38 ॥

Whenever, in due time, the connection of the Jiva (the human soul) with this body is brought about, then his pleasure, pains and death are written.

यस्य येन प्रक्रोगे मरणं दैविनिर्मितम् ।

त्यव तेनैव जातेन नान्यक्षेति विनिश्रय: ॥ 39 ॥

Know this as certain, very certain, that death will come to him in the manner as written by the hands of Fate; it will never be otherwise.

बहादीनां यथा काले नाशोत्पनी विनिर्मितं ।

तबेव भवतः कामं किमन्येषां विचार्यो ॥ 40 ॥

As the birth and death of Brahmā and other gods are ordained, your death had been similarly ordained; no, there is no need of taking the example further than this.

ये मृत्युपिंगपतैंशं वरतानेन दर्पिताः ।

मारियामो न मयवंते ते मृहा मन्द्वेतेसः ॥ 4 1 ॥

Those who are tied up by the hands of death are surely fools and of extremely blunt intellect, if they think simply on the strength of their getting some booms “that they would never die.”

तस्मादछ्न नृप बृहि वचनं मम सत्मम् ।

यदानापयते भूपसत्कर्तैलं त्वया किल ॥ 4 2 ॥

Therefore go quickly to your king and speak to him what I have said; you will then surely obey what he commands you to do.

मतया स्वर्गमाप्नोतु देवा: सन्तु हक्षियुंः ।

यूयं प्रयात पातालं यदि जीवितुमिच्छथ ॥ 4 3 ॥

If he wants his life, he, with his retinue, would at once go down to Pātāla; let Indra and the other Devas get possession of the Heavens and their share of Yajñas.

अन्यथा चेभातिर्वेर महिषयरु तुरात्मनः ।

त्वुध्यस्व मवा सार्थ मरणाय कृतात्रः ॥ 44 ॥

If he holds a contrary opinion, let him be eager

to go to the house of Death and come and fight with Me.

मन्यसे संगरे भग्ना देहा विद्युपुतेगमाः ।

दैर्व हि कारणं तत्र वर्दानं प्रजानेः ॥ ४ ५ ॥

If he thinks that Vishnu and the other Devas have fled from the battle-fields, he has nothing to boast of; for he has not shown his manliness at all even then; for his victory is solely due to his having got the boon from Brahmā.

व्यास उवाच

इति देया वच: शूला चिन्तयामास दानव: ।

किं कतिथ्या मया युद्धे नान्तवं वा नृपं प्रति ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of the Devi, the Dānava began to think “whether I ought to fight or to go to Mahisa?”

विद्यार्थीमहात्रानो राजा कामातुर्ण वे ।

तत्कर्वे विरसं कृत्वा गत्क्छेन नृपसक्तिधी ॥ 47 ॥

The King has become very enamoured and has sent me hither to negotiate for marriage; how then will I be able to go to him if I make this affair unpleasant and interrupted in the middle in its course of harmony."

इयं बुद्धिः सभीदीना यद्धजामि कलि विना ।

यथाउजातं तथा शीर्भ ग्रांत सेवेदयाम्यदूम् ॥ 48 ॥

Now it is wise for me to go to the King without fighting; let me then go as early as possible in this way and inform him about this whole affair.

स प्रभाणं पुनः कार्यं गताम मितमांतं वरः ।

क्रतिथित विचार्यैव सचिवैर्निपृष्णे: सह ॥ 49 ॥

The King is exceptionally intelligent and experienced; he will consult with his other experienced ministers and do what is best.

सहसा न मया युद्रं कतल्ममनया सह ।

जये पराजये वाथि प्रप्तोष्रियं भवेत् ॥ 50 ॥

Therefore I ought not to fight here rashly; for victory or defeat would alike be distasteful to my monarch.

यदि मा सुंदरी हन्यादहं या हन्म तां पुनः ।

येन केनायण्यायेन स कुवोर्याधिवः किल ॥ 51 ॥

Šrimaddevīthāgavatam

Whether this Lady kills me, or I kill this Lady, the king will be angry in either case.

तन्यात्रवैर गत्वार्ड बोधीय्यामि तं पुम् ।

यवाउढ़ाथिहितं देय्या यवास्त्रिच करोतु सः ॥ 52 ॥

I will therefore go now to the king and tell him what the Devi has said; he will do whatever he likes.

व्यास उवाच

इति संचित्य मेधारी जगाम नृपसिद्धधि ।

प्रणाय तमुवाचैदं कृतांजलिसायाकः ॥ 53 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus that intelligent son of the minister argued and went to the king. Then, bowing down before him, he began to say thus:

मन्युवाच

राजन्देवी वरागोहा सिंहस्योपरि संस्थिता ।

अष्टाविशुभ्जा नया वरायुधधरा पत्ता ॥ 54 ॥

O King! That excellent woman, fascinating to the world, the beautiful Devi is sitting on a lion with weapons in all her eighteen hands. O King! I told her:

सा मयोत्ता महाराज महिंषं भज भाविता ।

महिषी भव राजसर्व तैगेलकायिपतेः पिया ॥ 55 ॥

“O Beautiful Lady! Be attached to Mahisāsura; you will become, then, the queen-consort of the king, the lord of the three worlds.

पुताजी तर्वेवास्य भविता नात्र संशयः ।

स तत्ज्ञाकरो जातो क्यवर्ती भविषयिति ॥ 56 ॥

You will certainly then be his queen-consort; he will pass his life, ever obedient to you like an obedient servant.

त्रैलोक्यविषयं भुक्त्वा चिरकालं वरानने ।

महिंशे परित्यासाठ्य योचितां सुभगम भव ॥ 57 ॥

"O Beautiful One! If you choose to make Mahisa your husband, you will become fortunate amongst women and will enjoy ever all the wealth of the three worlds."

इति महदानं भूत्वा सा स्यावोदगोर्भिता ।

मातुबच चिशालाड़ी सितमुर्बमिति वचः ॥ 58 ॥

Hearing my these words, that large-eyed

woman, puffed up with egoism, laughed a little and said thus:

महिषीर्षभिसम्पूतं पशुनामधरं किल ।

खलि दास्याम्बहं देखे सुगणां हितकाघमया ॥ 59 ॥

"Your king is born of a buffalo and is the worst of brutes; I will sacrifice him before the Devi for the benefit of the gods. Is there any woman in this world so stupid as to select Mahisa as her husband?

का मुका कामिनी लोके महिंवे वे पतिं भबेत् ।

मातृषी मन्त्वदुके किं पयुभावं भवेनिद्ध ॥ 60 ॥

महिषी महिंदा नावं सर्शगा श्रगसंयुतम् ।

कुकते कन्दमाना वे नाहं तत्सदृषी शका ॥ 61 ॥

O You stupid! Can a woman like me ever indulge in bestial sentiments! A female buffalo has got horns; she, being excited with passion, may select your Mahiṣa with horns as her husband and come to him bellowing. I am not stupid nor like her so as to make him my husband.

कतिच्छेड़े मुधे युद्धे हिचेल वांं सुरापिष्यम् ।

गछ्ध वा दृष्ट पातालं जीवितेच्छा यदित्ते ते ॥ 62 ॥

O Villain! I will fight and destroy the enemies of the gods in the battle-field. Or if he desires to live, let him flee to Pātāla.

परन्तु तृ तथा वाक्यमित्युक्तं नृय मतया ।

तच्छूलाड़ं समावातः प्रविष्टित्य पुनः पुनः ॥ 63 ॥

O King! Hearing those rough words uttered by Her in a moment of madness, I have come to you, thinking also how to redress this wrong.

सभंगं विविच्वैव न युद्धे तु मया कृतम् ।

आज्ञां तिवा तावाल्यन्ते ककं कुर्गा युंचोघामम् ॥ 64 ॥

O King! Only I feared not to interrupt in your love sentiment; and therefore I did not fight with Her; especially, without Your command, how can I engage myself in useless excitement?

साउसीच च कलोन्मत्ता वर्तते भूप भामिनि ।

शवितळं न ज्ञानाभि किं वा भावि भविष्यति ॥ 65 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! That handsome woman rests maddened on Her own strength; I do not know what is the womb of future or whatever is destined to happen, will surely come to pass. You

Book V Chapter XI

are the sole master in this matter; I will do whatever you order me.

கார்பீரியைல் प्रमाणं नो मन्योरितील वुरासदः ।

युद्धं पलायनं श्रेयो न जानेउहं चिन्धिश्यम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

इति शीमदैर्षीभागवते महापुराणे पड़सदकन्थे

दशगोर्धायाः 11 10 11

The matter is very difficult to be reflected upon; whether it is better to fight or it is better to fly away, I cannot say definitely.

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the messenger's news to Mahisa, in Śrimaddevī-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XI

मामामान रसा यावा.

CHAPTER XI

On Tämräs Fight with the Devi

ཡབས བབས

སྒྱི་ཆེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཅེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཅེ་སྟན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཅེ་བྱིན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཅེ་བྱིན་ཆེ་སྟན་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱོག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྱིག་ཅེ་བྲུག་ཅེ་བྲུག་ཅེ་བྲུག་ཅེ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག་ཅོ་བྲུག།

diseases, so true words, though appearing unpleasant, lead to beneficial results. Those that are simply pleasant, are generally injurious as to their effects.

सत्यस्य श्रोता मन्ता च तुरंभ पृथिवीयते ।

वक्ताउपि तुरंभ: कामं बह्वश्रतुभाषका: 11 6 11

O Lord of the Earth! The bearers and approvers of truth both are very rare; truth speakers also are very difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is found in a great measure in this world.

कथं बुभोउत्र नृपते विवारे गहने तिहह ।

गुर्णे बाउपयुर्णे बार्थि को बेथिं घुवनजये ॥ 7 ॥

O King! Nobody in the three worlds knows what will be good or what will lead to inauspicious results? How can we then definitely pronounce our judgment in this difficult matter?

राजोवाच

त्यव्यमान्नुसारेण बुवंलब्धा पुथक्यथक् ।

येवां हि याङ्गो यावस्तच्छूता चिन्तयायमूम् ॥ 8 ॥

The King said: Let each of you say separately, according to his own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all consider for myself.

बहूतां मतमात्राय विवार्यं च पुनः पुनः ।

यच्छेयस्तद्धि कर्तव्यं कार्यविचक्षणैः ॥ 9 ॥

Clever persons should hear the opinions of several persons, then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that as what is to be done.

व्यास उवाच

तर्यैवं वच्नं शुत्वा विक्सप्यो महावलः ।

उवाच तरसा वाक्यं रंजवम्पृथिवीपतिम् ॥ 10 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing his words, the powerful Virūpāka same out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King.

विकल्पा उवाच

राज्ञरी वराकीय सा बृते मदार्विता ।

विभीषकामाजिरिंदं जातल्यं वचनं तथा ॥ १ ॥

Virūpāka said: O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you.

को विभोत सिक्यो वास्यैटुकेनै: रणतुर्दैः ।

अन्ततं साहरं चेति जानराशिविधेत्ति ॥ 12 ॥

The efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be afraid therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising her ownself in matters of warfare?

त्रिला विभुवनं राजत्रढा कान्तापघेन वै ।

दीनतेउदयशे नूनं वीरस्य घुवने भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

O King! You have conquered the three worlds by your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your inferiority, out of fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much disgrace in this world.

तस्माधायमेकाकी युद्वाय चपिड़ां प्रति ।

हनिये तो महाराज निर्भयी घव साम्यतम् ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with Candikā and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear.

सेनावृतोर्ध नाला तां शलालीस्विविधः किल ।

निपुर्दयामि दुर्मर्गे चाधिकांப் चाप्रदिक्रमम् ॥ 15 ॥

बट्टा सर्मवै: पाशैरानायिधे त्वांतिकम् ।

वशगता तु सदा ते सत्यस्य राजन्बलं मय ॥ 16 ॥

O King! Seemy prowess now; I am just now going with my army and I will kill that violent Candikā, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her down by a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, seeing Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there is no doubt in this.

व्यास उवाच

विरूपाधावच: श्रुत्वा दुर्भीयो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।

सत्यमुक्ते वचो राजन्विरूपाधेशण धीमता ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these words of Virūpākṣa. Durdhara said: O King! Virūpākṣa is very intelligent; what he has said just now is all reasonable and true.

मापसी घचनं रूक्षण श्रोतल्यं धीमता रव्या ।

कामातुरैया सुदृती लक्ष्यतेउ्यनुमानतः ॥ 18 ॥

O King! You are intelligent; hear my words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman with beautiful teeth as passionate.

भवत्येवयिता कामं नायिका रूपर्पति ।

भीषयिता वराहात् तां वशे कर्णैयच्छति ॥ 19 ॥

For that woman of broad hips has expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; the mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when they become passionate.

हावोर्ध मानिनितां वे ते वेति रसवितान: ।

वक्रोत्केश कामिन्या: प्रियं प्रत पशवाणम् ॥ 20 ॥

When they behave in this way, people call these amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the chief causes in attracting dear persons unto them.

वेति को3पि नरः कामं कामशास्त्रविध्वणः ।

यदुर्फे नाम बालीस्वां वधिष्ये रणामूर्पिति ॥ 21 ॥

Those who are skilled in the art of love affair, some of them can know these things thoroughly well. O King! That woman has said, "I will pierce and kill you by arrows, face to face, in the battlefield."

हैतुणर्भिर्यं वाययं जातव्यं हेतुवितपेः ।

बाणासु पानीनीयं वे कटाङ्गा एव विश्रुतः ॥ 22 ॥

The sense of this is different. The wise persons that are clever and experienced in the art of finding out the cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant with deep and esoteric meaning.

पुर्णाजलियायाश्रान्ये व्यंयाति वचनाति च ।

का शफिन्तन्यबाणांां प्रेणे लविय पार्थिव ॥ 23 ॥

You can easily see that the handsome women have no other arrows with them; their side-glances are their arrows. And their words carry their hidden

Book V Chapter XI

meanings, and, expressing their desires, are their flowers.

तातुशीना न सा शफित्बंड्वविष्णुराविष्यु ।

ययोक्ते नेत्रबाणीस्वां हनिषेय मन्द पार्थिव्यम ॥ 24 ॥

O King! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa even have no powers to shoot arrows at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who appears so passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said: "O Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.

विरपरितं परित्ञतं तेनारसिवहा किल ।

पतार्थिच्यापि श्याच्यां रणमयां पत्ति तब ॥ 25 ॥

विपरिततितकीआभाषणं जेमेवत तत् ।

"But the messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt, understood her words in their contrary sense." The saying of that lady "I will lay your lord in the death-bed in the battlefields" is to be taken in the light of inverted sexual intercourse, where woman is above the man.

कीचेय विमाताणं यतुकं कचनं तथा ॥ 26 ॥

वीर्य प्राण इति प्रोकं तद्धिहीनं न चान्यथा ।

Her utterance “I will take away the vitality (life) of your lord is also significant.” The semen virile is known as the vitality (life). Therefore the above expression means that she will make you devoid of your virility. There can be no other meaning.

वंयायधिखेन वावकेन वरवत्यनाम गृध ॥ 27 ॥

तदे विचाराते जेयं रसप्राथविशक्षणैः ।

O King! Those women that are excellent shew by too much of their covert expressions (inuedos) that they select and like very much their beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs will be able to appreciate these things.

इति जाता महाराज कतव्य रससंयुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

सामदानवृदं तथा नान्योपायोरिति घृपते ।

Knowing thus, dealings ought to be made with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not broken. O King! Sāma (conciliation) and

Dāna (gifts) are the two means to be adopted; there is no other way.

रुहा या गविला वासि यशमा मानिनी भवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

तादूर्शीपूरेवावैर्येनाविष्ये त्वान्तिकम् ।

किं बढ़ूक्तेन मे राजकर्ताया यशपार्तिनी ॥ 30 ॥

गत्वा मवाउघुनैवयं किंककीय सदैव ते ।

By these two, that Lady, whether she be proud or angry, is sure to be brought under control; I will go not and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O king! What is the use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you like a slave girl.

व्यास उवाच

इर्थे निशम्य तुढालयं तास्तस्त्वविश्वण: ॥ 31 ॥

उवाच चवनं राजक्षिगामय मयोदितम् ।

हेतुपद्वर्मसहितं रसयुक्ते नवान्यितम् ॥ 32 ॥

नैषा कामातुरा बाला नानुर्जक विश्वक्षण ।

व्यंभाविन नैव वाक्यानि त्योक्तानि तु मान्द ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Dānava Tāmra, who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said: 'I am telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same time full of sweet amorous feelings pregnant with deep meanings. "O Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all passionate nor devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert expressions to you."

चित्रमत्र महावाहो यदेका वरर्गिनी ।

निरलाव्बा समायाति चित्रकरा मनोहरा ॥ 34 ॥

“O Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a Lady, beautiful, handsome, and of strange feature, at the same time alone and helpless, has come here to fight.

अशदारभुजा नारी न शुता न च वीक्षिता ।

केनापि विश्र लोकेषु पराक्रमवतीं शृणा ॥ 35 ॥

आयुधान्यपि तावर्ते घृतानि बलवित्ति च ।

विपरीतिंमदं मन्ये सर्वं कालकृतं नृप ॥ 36 ॥

A good-looking woman, powerful, and having eighteen hands is never heard of, nor ever seen by me in these three worlds. She is holding in each

Šrimaddevibhagavatam

of Her hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to be the contrary actions of Time.

स्वपानि वुर्निमितानि मग रूषानि वे निशि ।

तेन जाताम्यहं नृते वैशसं समुपगानम् ॥ 37 ॥

O King! I saw ominous dreams during the night; and I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads.

कृष्णावरधरा नारी रूटती च गृहांगे ।

दृष्टवा स्वपेयुष:काले विंतितल्यस्तदायः ॥ 38 ॥

Early in the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the above.

विकृता: पक्षिणो राजी रोकवन्ति गृहे गृहे ।

उरपाता विविधा राजम्पभविति गृहे गृहे ॥ 39 ॥

तेन जानाभरहं नूनं कारणं किकिष्ठदेव हि ।

यत्वां प्रार्थयेत बाला युद्धाय कृतनिश्राय ॥ 40 ॥

O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house and various calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this time that woman, firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, therefore, seems to me that there is something very serious in this matter.

नैवान्त्रित मनुषी नो वा गाधर्वीं न तथायुरी ।

देवै: कृतेय ज्ञात्मा यामाभोहकरी विभो ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord! This woman is neither human, nor a Gāntharvī, nor the wife of any Asura. Only to cause delusion to us, she, this wondrous Māyā has been created by the gods.

काततत्वं न कतवेंय मेपित्तमतिपयल्यम् ।

कर्तैवं सर्वथा युद्धं यद्धानं तद्धविषयित् ॥ 4 2 ॥

O King! In no case, weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all means to fight as best as possible; what is inevitable will come to pass; this is my opinion.

को बेद देवक्तियं शुभं वास्यगुभं तथा ।

अरतल्य घिया दीर्घ स्थानतयं वै: विश्वभौः ॥ 43 ॥

No one is able to unriddle the doings of the Devas, whether they would be auspicious or

inauspicious. Therefore intelligent ones should weigh pros and cons carefully and remain patient and steady.

जीवित मरणं पुंसां दैवधीर्न नराधिप ।

कोर्पि नैवान्यथा कर्तु समर्थं घृतनगरे ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Life or death is at the hands of destiny; Nobody, therefore, can do it otherwise."

गच्छ ताप महाभाग युद्धाय कृतनिश्रयः ।

ताभानय वरगोहां जिल्या धर्मेण मानिनीम् ॥ 45 ॥

Hearing this, Mahisāsura said: "O Highly fortunate Tāmra! Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go that Lady, beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring Her before me.

न भवेद्रागा नारी संग्रामे यदि सा तव ।

हन्तवा नान्यथा कामं माननीया प्रधत्नतः ॥ 46 ॥

"In case She does not come under your control in fight, kill Her; but if She comes round, then shew Her honour; do not kill Her.

वीरस्वमसि सर्वत्र कामगशाखिशापादः ।

येन केनाव्युपायेन जेतक्यो वरवर्शिणी ॥ 47 ॥

O All knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly conversant with Kāma Śāstra (science of love); therefore conquer that Fair One by any means you can.

त्वरन् वीर महाबाहो सैन्येन महता वृत: ।

तत्र नगला त्वया झेय विचार्यं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

O valiant Tāmra, of mighty prowess! Go then with a mighty force and ponder over again and again and find out Her intention.

किमर्थयाता चेयं तात्यां तिद्धि कारणम् ।

कामात्रा वैरभावाच्च माया कर्येवियातृम् ॥ 49 ॥

Is She prompted by passion or by real inimical feeling or by any other motive? Try to find out whose Māyā is this?

आदौ तक्रिश्रयं कृत्वा जातवयं तिच्चाकीर्भिन् ।

पश्रातुघूं प्रकर्तेल्यं यथायोग्यं यथाबतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Know all these beforehand; then find out the remedy; next fight with Her according to your strength and prowess.

Book V Chapter XI

क्रातरखे न कतिथ्य निद्रेयलं तथा न च ।

याजूर्ग हि मनस्तस्या: कतिथं ताजूर्ण तथा || 51 ||

Weakness should not be shown nor merciless behaviour is to be resorted; you should behave with Her according to the bent of Her mind.

व्यास उवाच

इति तद्धाविं शृत्वा तायः कालवर्ग नतः ।

निर्भात: सैन्यसंयुक्तः प्रणाय्य महिष्चं नृपम् ॥ 52 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus hearing the King's words, Tāmra coming as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahiṣa and marched away with his army.

गच्छमार्गे दुरावास्तीशकुनावीश्य दरभान्न ।

विव्यवं च भयं प्राप यमभागप्रदर्शकान् ॥ 53 ॥

That wicked Dānava, who on his way, began to see all the fearful inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and was caught with fear.

स पत्ता तां सामालीक्य देवीं सिंशोषी स्थितान् ।

सूद्यमानां सुरै: सर्वे: सर्वायुधविष्णवितान् ॥ 54 ॥

When he arrived at the spot he saw the Devi standing on a lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons and instruments, and all the Devas chanting hymns to Her.

तात्याच विमिता: सन् वाक्यं मधुरया सिता ।

सामभावं समाश्रित्य विनयावन्तः स्थितः ॥ 55 ॥

Tāma, then bowed down before Her with humility and modesty and addressed Her with sweet words, according to the rules of the policy of conciliation.

देवि दैतेवधरः श्रुंगी त्वद्वपुणामोहितः ।

सूष्ठां कोतित महिषस्त्वाणिश्रद्धाया च ॥ 56 ॥

“O Devi! Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, has become enchanted on hearing Your beauty and qualifications and has become desirous to marry You.”

भार्यं कृक विशालास्थि तत्सम्रमरतुर्णे ।

पाति तं प्रायय मृदुर्गिन नन्दने विहराद्धते ॥ 57 ॥

O Beautiful One! You would better be graciously pleased with that conqueror of the Immor-

tals, the Mahisāsura; O Thou of delicate limbs! Make him your husband and enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of the Nandana garden as best as you can.

सर्वागसूनरं देई प्राय सर्वसुखास्यद् ।

सुखं सर्वसेन्या ग्राहं दुःखं हेयमिति स्थिति: ॥ 58 ॥

The end and aim of attaining this human form, beautiful in every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to enjoy, in every way, all the pleasure of human existence and to avoid the sources of all troubles. This is the rule.

करभोक किमर्थे ते गृहीतान्यायुधान्यम् ।

पुष्पकन्दुकीयागते कारा: कमलकौमतः ॥ 59 ॥

O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! Your soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice balls of flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the weapons and arrows?

ब्रुचाये विद्यानेपर विधृया किं प्रजोजनम् ।

कटाक्षा विशिष्ठा: सन्ति कि वाणीनैण्यवोनैः ॥ 60 ॥

What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, when those two eyebrows like bows, are existing with You?

संसारे कुःखदं युद्धे न कतकैलं विज्ञानता ।

लोभासक्ता: प्रकृतीत संग्रामं च परस्पत् ॥ 61 ॥

What need have you to take ordinary arrows when you are graced with that piercing eyesights, your arrows.

पृष्येपि न योद्धल्यं किं पुनर्निरिति: शरैः ।

घेदनं निजगगाणां कस्य तज्जायते पुंदे ॥ 62 ॥

War is exceedingly painful in this world; those who know thus ought never to fight. It is only those human beings that are prompted by greed, that fight with each other.

तस्मात्मपरि तर्वयि प्रसादं कतुर्महसि ।

भतरं भज मे नाथं देवदानवपूजितम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

What to speak of those sharpened arrows, one ought not to fight with flowers even; O Devi! You can well say who is that feels pleasure, when one's own body is pierced?

Śrimaddevibhaigavatam

स तेउर वाछित्त सर्व कारित्यति मनोराथ।

तं पुभुमिकी राज: सर्वथा नात्र संपर: ॥ 64 ॥

Therefore, O Delicate One! Gladly you can worship Mahiṣa, the lord of the world and the object of worship of the Devas and Dānavas. Then he will satisfy all your desires. What more to say, you will no doubt be his queen-consort.

वचनं कुक मे देखि प्राययसे सुखमुत्तमम् ।

संग्रामे जयसेंटुः कहं प्राय न संग्रशः ॥ 6 5 ॥

O Devi! If one tries one's best, it is doubtful whether one would be crowned with success; therefore keep my this request; you will surely get all the best pleasures.

ज्ञानासि राजनीति लं यथावदुर्वर्णिनि ।

भूव्र राज्यसुखं पूर्णे वर्षाणामयुतायुतम् ॥ 6 6 ॥

"O Beautiful! You are well acquainted with

all the politics; therefore you better enjoy thoroughly the pleasure of the kingdom for full many years.

पुत्रसे घसिता क्रांत: सोअपि राजा भविष्यिति ।

योजने क्रीष्टिवान्ते वार्विये सुखाग्यस्विं ति 67 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पक्षमकन्धे

एकावरशोउकायः ।। ११ ।।

"And if you marry Mahisa you will have beautiful sons and those sons again will be kings; and enjoying the pleasures of your full grown womanhood, you will no doubt, be happy in your old age."

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing of the Dānava Tāmsra before the Devi in Śrimaddevibhagāvatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XII

On the Cabinet Held by Mahiṣa

व्यास उवाच

तिश्राम्य चचस्तस्य तात्यस्य जगद्धिक्का ।

मेयाम्भीरा वाचा हस्तनी तमुवाच् च ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: The World-Mother, hearing Tāmra's words, spoke laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder cloud.

देख्यवाच

गच्छ ताप यतं बृहि मुपुषु मन्दोतसम् ।

महिंचं चातिकामातं मूदं ज्ञानविवर्जितम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi spoke: “O Tāmra! Go and say to your Lord Mahisa who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very passionate, and who is void of knowledge of what is proper and what is improper.

यथा ते महिषी माता प्रीक्षा यवसभक्षिणी ।

नाहं तथा शृगवती लम्बपुच्छा महोदरी ॥ ३ ॥

I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly.

न कामपेउई देवेशं नैव विद्युं न शक्रिम् ।

धनदं वर्णो नैव ब्रह्माणं न च पावकम् ॥ 4 ॥

I do not like to have even Visnu, the god Śaṅkara, Brahmā, Kubera, Varuna, or Fire.

एतान्देवाणादित्य पगुं केन युणेन वै ।

युणोम्यहं यूथा लोके गहीणां मे भवेदिति ॥ 5 ॥

How then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of much censure amongst the several worlds.

नाहं पतिवरा नारी वर्तते मे पति: प्रभु: ।

सर्वकर्ता सर्वसाधी ह्यकर्ता निःसृष्टः स्थग: ॥ 6 ॥

I am not desirous of any more husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all, Witness of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and He is calm and tranquil.

निर्गुणो निर्मांतीउनन्तो निरालम्बो निराश्रयः ।

सर्वैन: सर्वैन: साक्षी पूर्ण: पूर्णाशय: जिज: ॥ 7 ॥

He, the Śiva, is devoid of any Prāktric qualities, without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone to rely on, without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great Witness, the Full, and the scat of the Full, the Auspicious.

Book V Chapter XII

सर्वावास: क्षम: शान्त: सर्वद्वसर्वभावन: ।

तं चक्सना माहियं मन्दं कवं संवितुपुलहो ॥ 8 ॥

He is the abode of all, capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create everything and He is seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him and try to serve dull, stupid Mahisa?

प्रशुध्य युध्यतां कामं कारोमि यमावहान् ।

अथवा मनुजानां वै कार्ये जलवाहकम् ॥ ९ ॥

Let him come and fight with this understanding that he will be defeated and be made the conveyance of Yama, the God of Death or the carrier of water of the human beings.

जीवितेष्ठप्रति देवाया गळछ पालालमाशु वै ।

समसरीर्विवैयुक्तत्वव्या हृन्मि संगरे ॥ १० ॥

And if that impious heretic desires to live let him fly at once to Pātāla with all his demon comrades; else I will slay him in battle.

कामं सदूषायोर्गे: संसारे सुखदो घबेत् ।

अन्यवा तुःखदो घ्यावत्नानादिर कल्मितः ॥ १ १ ॥

See! combination of similar substances leads to happiness; and if out of ignorance, the connection takes place between things entirely different in their nature, it becomes at once the source of all pain and troubles."

मुर्जल्मवसि यदचूषे पर्ित मे भज आधिनि ।

क्याहं क्य महिषः शूत्री सवचः कीरुणो इयोः ॥ 12 ॥

You are a thorough by illiterate when you ask me to worship your lord; do you not see me endowed with exquisite beauty? and what is your Mahisa? A buffalo with horns; how can then connection become possible between us?

गच्छ सुध्यस्य वा कामं हनिष्येहं सवान्यवम् ।

यद्भागरं देवतलोके नोतेच्यकता सुखी भव ॥ 13 ॥

Better fly away or fight if you like; I will kill you and your friends, and if you leave the region of Heaven and the share of Yajña, then you will become happy."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा सा तात द्वेो वेगर्भ शुभामूद्तम् ।

कल्यान्तसूर्ण नावं चक्रे दैत्यभयावहम् ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Devi howled and roared so loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror to the Dānavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at the end of a Kalpa.

चक्षेय वसुधा चेलुस्तेन शब्देन भूधराः ।

भाधिशु दैन्यपत्नीना सर्वसुर्गर्पित्तस्वन्ता ॥ 15 ॥

The earth and the mountains trembled: the wives of the Dānavas had miscarriage at that terrific noise.

ताघः शुत्वा च तं शब्दं भयसत्मानस्ताद ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा जगाम महिष्योतिकम् ॥ 16 ॥

Tāmra hearing that sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he at once fled to Mahiṣa.

नगरे तस्य वे दैत्यास्तेपि चित्तमायानुवत् ।

वधिरीकृतकर्णगीछ पलायनपरा नृप ॥ 17 ॥

O King! The Dānavas present in the city became deaf; they fled and became very anxious and were absorbed in the thought whence and how that sound came.

तदा कोर्टेन सिंहोरूपि ननाद भुशमूलस्टः ।

तेन नाटेन दैतेवा भयं जगमूरिय स्कुटम् ॥ १ ॥ ॥

तापं समागतं दूद्या ह्वारीरिंग मोहितः ।

चिंतयामास सचिवः किं कल्यमतः परम् ॥ १९ ॥

The lion, too, enraged and, raising up its manes, roared so loud that the Daityas became very much terrified. Mahisa too, became confounded to see Tāmra returning; he then held a council with his ministers on what ought to be done next?

दुर्गग्राहो वा कतव्यो युद्ध निरर्गत्व वा पुनः ।

पलायने कृते श्रैयो भयेड़ा द्वान्वोतमाः ॥ 20 ॥

Mahisāsura said: "O best of the Dānavas! Shall we now take our shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and fight? Or will it be favourable to us if we fly away?

बुद्धिमन्तो दुताधर्षी: सर्वे शास्त्रविशगरातः ।

मनः खतु प्रकल्पः सुगुप्तः कार्यसिद्धो ॥ 21 ॥

You all are intelligent and versed in all the Śāstras and unconquerable by your foes; therefore

ought you all to consult over the matter in utmost privacy for our success at the present moment.

मन्त्रभूलं स्मृतं राज्यं यदि स स्यात्सृक्षितः ।

मन्त्रभिक्षा सदाचारित्विधेयः सर्वेधा चुयेः ॥ 22 ॥

The root of Kingdom lies in the council in the secret place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if this counsel be kept well preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is also kept entire; therefore it is good and virtuous.

मन्त्रधेते विज्ञा: स्याज्ञस्य प्रपतेलया ।

तस्माद्रेवपयात्युतः कतवीय भूतिभिछ्ठता ॥ 23 ॥

If the plan be out, then destruction comes both to the King and his Kingdom; hence the plan must be kept secret by those wanting glory, lest it be taken advantage of and rendered ineffective by other persons.

तद्व मत्निषिबाँच्छं वचनं हेतुपादितून ।

कालदेशानुसारेण विविधेन नीतिनिवर्धियम् ॥ 24 ॥

या योषात्र समावाता प्रवला देविनिमिता ।

एकाकिनी निरालम्बा कारणं तद्धिव्यताम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Ministers! Now declare, taking due consideration of time and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining what is the best course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of reason and intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful woman, created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless?

युद्ध प्रार्थयेत बाला किमाध्ययेत: परम् ।

श्रेयोत्र विवर्गितं वा को वेति भुवनत्रये ॥ 26 ॥

That woman is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be than this? Who can say in the three worlds what the result will be, whether it will be good or otherwise?

न बहूनां जयोउपत्यित नैकस्य च परावयः ।

दैत्यापीनी सदा जेगेयु युद्रे जयपरावजी ॥ 27 ॥

Victory comes not to many persons nor defeat comes to a single individual; therefore victory or defeat lies at the hands of the Luck and Destiny.

उयायवादितः प्रगृदैर्व कैन कैन वीक्षितम् ।

अनुश्मिति यजाम प्रवर्तिन मनीषिणः ॥ 28 ॥

तस्तचेडपि प्रमाणं किं कततराणावलंबनम् ।

Those who plead for place, policy, statesmanship, they say what is Fate? Is there anyone who has seen Fate? (Adṛṣṭa) No one has seen His appearance." It may be argued that there may exist such a thing as Fate; to which it might be replied, what proofs are there for such an existence?

न समर्थजनानां हि दैर्व कुजापि लक्ष्यते ॥ 29 ॥

उद्यानो दैवलमेते हि शूरकातायोर्मन्ति ।

विधिन्याथ विधा सर्वी कतैल्यं कायमादातृम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus the weak persons alone hold it out as their only hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can fulfil their ends by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves under Fate. Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and “Fate” is the word of cowards. You should all consider today these subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?

व्यास उवाच

इति राजी वचः शुत्वा हेतुगर्भ महायाशा: ।

विद्वाताख्यो महाराजमिव्युवाच कृतांजलितः ॥ 31 ॥

राजेशेय शिवगालाशी ज्ञातया यतन्तः पुनः ।

किम्बर्धिंहि सभ्यापता कुतः कस्य परिश्रहः ॥ 32 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidālākṣa with folded hands spoke thus: "O king! First it should be definitely ascertained as to whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? Whence and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought to be done should be decided.

मरणं ते परिश्राय सिक्वा: सर्वानिमा सुरैः ।

प्रेशिता यदपत्राक्षी समुचणा स्ततेजास ॥ ३३ ॥

It seems to me that the Devas, knowing that your death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have created very carefully this lotus-eyed woman out of their own essences.

तेपि छातः स्थिताः खेउत्र सर्वे युद्धिदूक्षतः ।

समयंेःस्थाः महायासे भविष्याति युयुसासः ॥ 34 ॥

And they are lying in wait, unknown to anybody in the celestial space with a desire to see the battle

Book V Chapter XII

but really to fight with you. In due time, they will undoubtedly help this woman.

पुस्त: कामिनी कृत्ता ते वे विद्यापुरोगमाः ।

विध्यन्ति च नः सर्वान्सा त्वं युद्धे हनिषयिति ॥ 35 ॥

When the war will ensue, Viṣṇu and the other Devas will put this woman in front and slay us all. Whereas this Devi will slay you.

एतचिक्वीर्तिते तेनां मवा ज्ञातं नराधिता ।

भवितत्यस्य न ज्ञानं वर्तेत मम सर्वेथा ॥ 36 ॥

This is their earnest desire. O king! I have come to know this beforehand; but what will be the actual result I cannot say.

योद्योपं न तव्याडोति नाहं वचुः क्षमः प्रभो ।

प्रमाणं त्वं महाराज कार्येज्ञ देविनिमिते ॥ 37 ॥

I cannot say also whether it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore it would be better if you consider yourself well on this matter of the gods and do accordingly.

त्वर्धेंउमाधिरनिणं मतंव्य कार्योगरावत् ।

विद्रतैंत्य तवा साधीमेव धर्मेउनुजीविनाम् ॥ 38 ॥

Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in this: That we should sacrifice at any moment our lives for the preservation of your prestige; and to enjoy with you whenever you are enjoying.

विद्यारोउन महान्सित यदेका कामिनी नृप ।

यूद्र प्रार्थवेउसामभि: ससै-यैर्वलिरपिंतेः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

But, O King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this very carefully when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging us to fight who are armed with powerful soldiers.

दूर्यैल उवाच

राजन् युद्रे जयं नोउष चपिता वैव्यई किल ।

पलायनं न कर्तव्य यगोहानिकरं नृगाम ॥ 40 ॥

Durmukha said: "O king! I know for certain, that we will not get victory in this battle; still we ought not to shew our back; for that would lead us to sheer disgrace.

इत्रादीनां संयुप्रेपि न कृतं यज्ञगुषिसतम् ।

एकाकिनी सिधंग प्राय को हि कुर्पत्पलयात्यम् ॥ 41 ॥

Even in our encounter with Indra and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how can any of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless woman?

तस्मादुर्द प्रकर्नियं मरणां वा रणे जयः ।

यद्धालि तद्वलेवेक काऊत्र चिन्ता विषयश्न: ॥ 42 ॥

Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever happen's happen. What is inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, what need we care for the result?

मरणोत्र यशःप्रापिरिजीचे च तथा सुखम् ।

उभयं मनसा कृत्वा कतिथ्यं युद्धमष्ट वै ॥ 43 ॥

If we die in the battle, we will get name and fame; if we be victorious, we will get happiness. Thus thinking both the cases, we must fight today.

पलायने यशोहामिरणं चायुषः क्षये ।

तस्माछोको न कर्तव्यो जीक्षिते मरणे बुबा ॥ 44 ॥

Death is inevitable when our longevity expires; our prestige will suffer if we fly away; therefore we ought not to spend uselessly our time in thus expressing our vain regret for life or for death.

व्यास उवाच

दुर्भूतय स्व च: शुत्वा बाक्लते वायवमब्रवीत् ।

प्रणतः प्रांजलिभूत्वा राजानं वाक्यकोविदः ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus Durmukha's words, Bāskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped hands and his head bowed down.

वाक्पल उवाच

राजौक्षिता न कतव्या कार्येत्रीयकातरप्रिये ।

अहमेको हनियापि चपईी चंचल्लोचनाम ॥ 46 ॥

“O king! You need not think thus in agony upon this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Caṇḍikā, of unsteady eyes.

उत्ताहतु प्रक्रतिथः स्थायीभावो सस्य च ।

भयानको भवेहौरी वीरस्य नृपसतम ॥ 47 ॥

O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic indicates that one is steady in one's heroic valour, to consider one's enemy as dreadful

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

is contrary to above; so we ought not to take recourse to heroic valour.

तस्मायत्ववा भयं घूप कारिष्य युद्धमद्धुतम् ।

नत्यथामि नरेन्हाई चपिड़कां यमसावन् ॥ 4 8 ॥

O King! Therefore I will discard fear altogether and fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Candikā in the battle field to the abode of Death.

न विधेमि यमादिद्राकुधेवाढ्गणादि ।

वायोवैहैस्तथा विष्णो: शुक्राछ्डिशनो रेवे: ॥ 49 ॥

एकाकिनी तथा नारी किं पुर्नमेदारविता ।

उहं तां निद्विण्यामि विशिषेक्छे शिलापिति: ॥ 50 ॥

I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor Kubera, nor Vāyu nor Agni, nor Viṣṇu, nor Śaṅkara, nor Moon nor Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then, entertain of that vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her. I will kill Her with these arrows, sharpened on stones.

पश्य बाहुबलं मेउं हितरस्य यथासुरखम् ।

भवतात्रन न नत्वयं संग्रामे उपवन्या समम् ॥ 51 ॥

You can today see the prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to battle any more to fight with Her."

एवं बृवति राजेन्द्रं वाक्कते मदगविंते ।

प्रणाय नृपति तन दुर्धीते वाक्यमवीत् ॥ 52 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Bāskala having said thus to the lord Mahisa in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus:

दुर्धर उवाच

महिषहा विजेचायामि देर्वीं देवाविनिर्मितम् ।

अश्रदाशुजां रायां काराणाच्च समागताम् ॥ 53 ॥

“O Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the beautiful Devi with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may come hither, I will vanquish Her.

राजभीयवितुं त्वां वे प्रपोषा तिमिता सुरैः ।

विधीपिकेयं विज्ञाय त्वज मोहं मनोगतम् ॥ 54 ॥

O king! I think, it is simply to terrify you, as the Suras have thus created this Māyā woman; therefore, do you forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare.

राजनीतिरिंच राजन्मन्त्रिकृचं तथा श्रणु ।

साचित्का राजसा: कैरितानमासून तवापरे ॥ 55 ॥

O King! Such is the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the ministers. Ministers in this world are of three kinds: (1) Sāttvik; (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik.

मन्विणस्त्रिविधा लोके भविते दानवाधिप ।

सात्चका: प्रपुक्रायणीय साध्यपत्यि सखातिफिंभि: ॥ 56 ।

Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality is predominant, they perform their Master's duties according to their own strength.

आत्मकृत्य प्रकृवर्नित स्वामिकार्यविरोधतः ।

एकवित्ता धर्मपरा मन्त्रागत्कशियगरादः ॥ 57 ॥

The Sāttvik Mantri (ministers) are well versed in their Mantra Sāstras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and one-pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king and they fulfil their own purpose.

राजसा भिप्राचिता श्रु कव्यापिताना: सदा ।

कदाचित्यसामिकार्य ते प्रकुर्षिति यद्धच्या ॥ 58 ॥

The Rājasik Mantrīs are of different sorts; they are always after own interests; at times; whenever they like, they do the State duties.

तामसा लोभनितता: स्वक्यर्नितता: सदा ।

प्रभुकायं विनार्यैव स्वकर्ग साध्यान्ति ने ॥ 59 ॥

The Tāmasik Mantris always look of their own interests out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends even by ruining the regal interests.

समयं ते विधिन्धते पेस्टु परिवडिता: ।

स्विच्छर्ने शुण्रधीयानिर्दिशित गृहस्थितः ॥ 6 0 ॥

कार्यपेटकार नित्य कोशगृणताविसल्पा ।

संग्रामे5 थ समुस्परे औषयन्ति प्रभुं सदा ॥ 6 1 ॥

It is the Tāmasik Mantris that are influenced by the bribes from the enemies, become separated at their hearts from their own masters and give out the secrets to the enemies, while staying in their homes. They always advise alienation policy like the sword ensheathed in a scabbard; and when the time of war comes, they always frighten their masters.

Book V Chapter XIII

विश्वाससून न कतव्यस्तेषां राजकन्दाचन ।

विश्वास कार्वहीन: स्थानमन्दारिन: सदैव हि १ ६ २ १

खला: कि किं न कुर्जलि विश्वस्ता लभतवराः।

तामसा: पापनिरता बुद्धिहीनाः शठासस्था ॥ 6 3 ॥

Therefore, O King! Never put your trust on ministers; if you do so, they will always hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm cannot be done by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy, deceitful and void of any intelligence and always addicted to vicious acts, when they are trusted!

तस्माकार्यं करिष्यामि गतावड़हं रामसतेक ।

चित्ता तव्या न कर्तेव्या सर्वेथा नृपसत्तम ॥ 64 ॥

गृहीत्वा तां दुराचारामागमिष्यामि सत्वः ।

पश्य मेउडा बलं दीर्घं प्रभुकामों स्थशफिततः ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पहामकद्भ्ये

ब्राहणोउध्याः: 11 12 11

Therefore, O king! I will go myself to the battle and serve your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this matter. I will soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your actions by my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my strength, fortitude and valour.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the holding of counsel by Mahisāsura in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā Pruānam, of

18,000 Ślokas by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XIII

CHAPTER XIII

On the Killing of Bāskala and Durmukha

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता ती महाबाहू दैत्यों बाक्यलनुंगुंढ़ी ।

जगमनुर्मदिद्धगांगी सर्वशास्त्राकोदिति ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The two powerful Dānavas Bāskala and Durmukha, well-versed in arts of warfare, went out for battle, maddened with their prowess.

तौ गत्वा समरे देवीमूचतुर्वचंन तदा ।

दानवी च मदोन्मत्ती मेघमाम्पीत्या शिरा ॥ 2 ॥

The two Dānavas, elated with vanity, went to the battle-field and began to address the Devi in voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud.

देवि देवा जिता येन महिषेण महात्मना ।

वाय त वं तरातोरे सर्वैत्यापिधिं पुर्णम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Beautiful Devi! You better choose and worship the Lord of the Daityas, that high-souled Mahisāsura who has conquered all the Devas.

स कृत्वा मानुषं रूपं वर्मलक्षणसंयुतम् ।

भूषितं भूषणैदिख्यैस्त्वामेध्यति रहः किल ॥ 4 ॥

He will come before you in privacy in a human shape, with all auspicious signs and adorned with beautiful ornaments.

त्रैलोक्यविभयं कामं त्वमेध्यस गृधचिमिते ।

महिषे परं भयं भाकं कुरु कानते मनगेतगम् ॥ 5 ॥

O Sweet smiling One! Better place your highest feelings of love on the lovely Mahisa as your husband, and you will get all the pleasures of the three worlds as you desire.

कृत्वा पर्लिं महावीरं संसामसुखमढ़तम् ।

त्वं प्राप्यसि चिकालाये योचितां खलु वांक्षितम् ॥ ६ ॥

O Sweet speaking! In short, if you select him as your husband, you will be the mistress of those incomparable worldly happiness that women always aspire.

श्रीद्युबाच

जात्य तवं किं विज्ञानासि नारीयं काममोहिता ।

मन्दबुद्धिजलात्यर्ष भजेयं महिंश शठम ॥ ७ ॥

Hearing thus the words of Vāşkala and Durmukha, the Devi said: "O Stupid! Do you think Me as deluded by passion? Do I not possess strength and intelligence that I will worship that hypocrite Mahisa as husband?

कुलशीलगुणैसुन्यै तं भजन्ति कुलशिक्षय: ।

अधिक रूपचातुर्वैब्द्रशीलक्षमादिधि: ॥ 8 ॥

का नु कामातुरा नारी भयंेच्च यगुहविषणम् ।

पगुनामघां नूनं महिष्यं देवकपिणी ॥ 9 ॥

See! The ladies of a high family select those persons that are equal in rank as far as family and distinctions, qualifications and propriety of conduct are concerned or those who are superior in beauty, cleverness, intelligence and other qualifications. Then how can a Devi, becoming passionate, worship the worst of all beasts, the beast Mahisa?

गच्छ तं महिषं तृर्णं भूरं बाक्लतुर्मेदी ।

वदतं तद्ञचे दैत्यं गतृतुल्यं विषाणिनम् ॥ 10 ॥

भालतं गच्छ वातभ्येन संभागं कुरा वभा ।

रो जाते सहसाधो निर्भयः स्यादिति धुम्म ॥ 11 ॥

O two Asuras! Go you immediately to your King Mahiṣa resembling in his body like an elephant and having a pair of horns and tell him "Go either to Pātāla (the nether regions) or come and fight with Me; the Lord of the Devas will no doubt be happy if war ensues."

हलाई त्वा गमिष्यामि नान्यथा गमनं मम ।

इन्ध जाला सुवुरुबैद्य पेशेच्छसि तथा कुक ११ १२ १।

मामनिजीक्य धूभागे न स्थानं ते कदाचन ।

भविष्यति चतुण्यात दिवि वा गिरिकन्दरे ॥ 13 ॥

“O Stupid! My advent here cannot go in vain; I will easily slay you and then depart; knowing this do as you like.” “O Beast! Without conquering Me, you would get no shelter either in the heavens, or in this earth, or in the caves of mountains?

व्यास उवाच

इतृपुत्ती ती ताया दैत्यौ कोपालुकिलतलोचनौ ।

धनुबाँधणार्य वीरी युद्धकामी बथपुतुः ॥ 14 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, the two powerful Daityas, with eyes reddened with anger, firmly resolved to fight and took bows and arrows in their hands.

कृत्वा सुविष्णुं नादं देसी सा निर्भाय स्थिता ।

उभी च चक्रतुस्तीजां बाणवृहिं कुरूकृद्ध ।। १५ ॥

भगवत्ययि बाणीयान्मुगेच दानवौ प्रति ।

कृत्वास्तिमधुरं नादं देवकायार्थीसिद्धदे ॥ १६ ॥

O Descent of Kuru! The Devi then made a terrible noise and fearlessly stood there. The two Dānavas then began to shoot dreadful arrows at Her. For the victory of the Devas, the Devi also began to hurl arrows after arrows on the two Dānavas, emitting a sweet sound.

तयोसु बाषकललूर्ण सम्पुखो3प्रयुगाणे।

दुर्भुखः प्रेशकस्तत्र देवीभिभयुखः स्थितः ॥ 17 ॥

तयोर्भुंद्रमभूद्धोगं देवीबाषकल्योस्तदा ।

बाणातियरियात्यारैभंदरे मंद्येतेसान्म ॥ 18 ॥

Bāskala first came forward with no delay; and Durmukha stood aloof there simply as a witness. A terrible flight then ensued between the Devi and Bāskala; arrows, swords and weapons were seen shining in the air and raised terror to those that were dull in intellect.

ततः कुन्द्र जगमाता शूद्यात ते युद्धुमंदम् ।

जयान पद्धभिवर्गी कागोईः शिलानिंतः ॥ 19 ॥

Then the Mother of the Universe seeing Bāskala growing turbulent shot at him five arrows sharpened on stone.

दानवोदी शगत्नोद्याधिष्छेद निशिणे: शरैः ।

सदाधिततादयामास देवीं सिंहोपरि सिद्धात्म। ॥ 20 ॥

The Dānava, too, cut off the arrows of the Devi and hurled seven arrows at Her, seated on a lion. साउपि तं दशामिश्तीक्षैगः सुयीतः सायकैः खलम् ।

जयान तच्छरांश्चला जहास च मुबुरुईः ॥ 21 ॥

The Devi cut off the Dānava's arrows and shot at that hypocrite, sharpened arrows and began to laugh frequently.

अधिन्द्रेश आणेन चिष्ठदं च शासनम् ।

बाक्लोर्स पि यतं गृहा देवाँ हंतुमुपायची ॥ 22 ॥

She again cut off his arrows with Ardachandra arrow; Bāskala then pursued the Devi with a club in his hands to slay Her.

आगछर्टन गदायाणि दानवं मदगर्वितम् ।

चपिड़का स्वगदाधाते: पातयामास भृत्ते ॥ 23 ॥

Seeing the arrogant Dānava with club in his hands, Candikā Devi struck him down on the ground with Her own club.

Book V Chapter XIII

The very powerful Bāskala fell down on the ground but rose up within a very short time and hurled again on the Devi his club.

बाक्कल: पतितो भूमौ मुहुर्नादुत्वितः पुनः ।

चिक्षेप च गद्य सोरीय चिष्टकां चंद्रविक्रमः ॥ 24 ॥

Seeing him again attacking Her, the Devi got angry and pierced him with Her trident; Bāskala fell down, thus pierced, and died.

तमागच्छन्तमालोक्य देवी शुलेन बक्षसि ।

जयान बाषकर्त कुन्दा पपात च ममार सः ॥ 25 ॥

पत्तेत बाषकले सैन्यं भगत तस्य दुरात्मतः ।

जयेति च मुदा देवाङ्धुकुशुपर्गाने स्थिता: ॥ 26 ॥

Bāskala falling thus dead on the field, the soldiers of the wicked demon routed; whereas the Devas became glad and repeatedly shouted aloud "Victory to the Devi."

तरिमंधु सितदे देद्ये दुर्वैज्ञोरित्वालान्ति: ।

आजगाम रणे देदी क्लोभसंरक्तलोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

On this Daitya being slain, Durmukha came forward on the battlefield, filled with anger and accompanied by a stronger army.

तिथि तिथावले सोर्धि भाषमाण: पुन: पुन: ।

धनुर्बाणघः श्रीमात्रथसः कवचावृतः ॥ 28 ॥

Mounted on a chariot, shielded all over his body with a coat of armour, Durmukha came before the Devi, shouting all along “Wait, wait, O You weak woman!” and with bows and arrows in his hands. तमागछंतमालोकय देवी रंगखमावद्यत् ।

कोपयन्ती दानवं तं ज्याओंचे च चकार है ॥ 29 ॥

The Devi blew Her conchshell and made sounds by stretching Her bow in order to make the Dānava infuriated with anger.

सोर्पि बाणामुभोद्यगृ तैश्यागशिविणमान् ।

स्वाशीरनामहामाया चिद्धेद्व च ननाव च ॥ 30 ॥

The Asura then began to shoot sharp arrows after arrows like poisonous snakes. The Mahāmāyā, by Her own arrows, cut off those of Her enemy and began to shout loudly.

तयोः परस्यं मुव्दे बभव तुमुलं नृव ।

बाणशक्तिपदाप्रातैमुसलैस्तोमरैस्तथा ॥ 31 ॥

The fight then raged furiously, when both parties began to use arrows, Śaktis, clubs, Mūsalas, and Tomaras.

राणभूमौ तदा जाता कृदीरोयवहा नदी ।

पतितानि तदा तीर शिरोसि प्रवभुस्तदा ॥ 32 ॥

यथा सन्तरणायीय यमिकंकनायकैः ।

तृबीकतानि नीतानि नविशिषाणरैभूदा ॥ 33 ॥

Blood began to flow in the battle-field in torrents like rivers and on the banks of that river of blood, were seen the severed heads of the dead bodies which looked like so many hollow shells of gourds, as if kept there by the attendant of the god of Death, for their swimming purposes.

राषभमितदा घोरा बभूवातीत दुर्गा ।

शरीरै: पतितैभूमी खाद्यानेर्कृकादिधि: ॥ 34 ॥

गोपायुसारमेवाङ्ग काकाः कंका अयोगुपातः ।

गृधा: ग्रेशगांख खाद्यान्ति शरीरागि दुरायान् ॥ 35 ॥

The battle-field, then, became very dreadful and impassable; at some places dead bodies are lying; wolves were feeding on their flesh; at other places were seen jackals, dogs, herons, crows, vultures, eagles, and other voracious birds and beasts and iron-tipped arrows, eating the dead bodies of those wicked demons.

वबी वायुश दुर्निधो मुनीनां देहसंगतः ।

अभूतिकतिकताश्दः खानां पतभक्षिणाम् ॥ 36 ॥

Air began to emit an offensive smell, because of its contact with these corpses; and there were heard the heart-rending sounds of various carnivorous birds and animals.

तदा चुकोप दुर्भाला दुर्भुंकः कालभौहितः ।

देवामुवाच गर्येंण कृत्वा चोर्यकेंरं शुभम् ॥ 37 ॥

Then the wicked Durmukha began, as if inspired by the god of Death, to address the Devi angrily and arrogantly with his right hand raised up before Her.

गच्छ चाधिड हनियाथि त्वामश्रिव सुवातिलेशे ।

दैत्य वा भग वामोक महिषं मदार्वितम् ॥ 38 ॥

"Your brain has become perverted; fly away just now or I will send you unto death, or you

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

better accept the proud Mahiṣa, the lord of the Daityas, as your husband.

देव्युवाच

आसत्रमरण: कामं प्रलपयव्य महोहितः ।

अष्टिव त्वं हनिष्यामि ययावयं बाक्लोहतः ॥ 39 ॥

The Devi said: “O Villain! I see your death at hand this very day; therefore you are deluded and therefore raving like a mad man. I will kill you today like Bāskala.”

गच्छ वा तिछ वा मंद मरणं यदि रोचते ।

हूलां तां वैविध्यामि वालिंगं महीपीतुन्ति ॥ 40 ॥

O Stupid! Better fly away; or if you prefer death, then wait; I will slay you first; then the dull Mahisa, the son of she buffalo".

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य दुर्भुवो मतुमुक्तः ।

भुमोच बाणवहिं तु चरिष्ठकां प्रति दारुणम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Hearing thus, Durmukha, as if prompted by Death, hurled dreadful arrows on the Devi.

सार्थि तां तस्या ईल्चा बाणवहिं श्रिं: श्रैः ।

जयान टानवं कूदा चूर्वे जूदधरे यथा ॥ 42 ॥

तयोः परस्यरं युद्धे सझातं चातिककर्णम् ।

Instantly the Devi, too, cut off all his arrows and, infuriated with anger, pierced the Dānava by sharpened arrows as Indra had pierced Vītrāsura before. The fight then turned out very dreadful.

भयदं कातागणं च शूगाणं बलवधीनम् ॥ 43 ॥

देवी चिक्छेट तस्या धनुस्य करे चित्यान् ।

तथेव पड़ाधिबाणीर्बभघ्र तथमुन्तम् ॥ 44 ॥

O King! Weak persons become very afraid and strong ones become very excited. Instantly the Devi cut off the Asura's bow and broke his chariot by five arrows.

रधे भने महाबाहुः पदातिवृभुंखस्तदा ।

गदा गृहीता दुर्भारं जगाम चधिडको प्रति ॥ 4 5 ॥

On seeing his chariot broken, the powerful Durmukha attacked on foot the Devi with his club, very hard to overcome.

चक्रास स गद्याघतं सिंहमौली महावतात् ।

न चचाल हौरे: स्थानाताविहेतप्रेम महावत: ॥ 46 ॥

He knocked at the head of the lion with that club with great force; but the powerful lion did not become unsteady, though so very hard hit.

अधिकां ते समातेकय गतृपाणी पुरः स्थितम् ।

खडूनेन शितापोरण शिराकुळेद मौलितम् ॥ 47 ॥

Seeing the demon thus standing before Her, the goddess Ambikā cut down his head by her sharpened axe.

छिडे च मतके भूमी पगत दुर्मुखो मृतः ।

जयगर्भं तदा चकुम्पित्त निजांर भृगम् ॥ 48 ॥

On his head being thus severed, Durmukha fell down dead on the field. The band of Immortals, then, loudly shouted “Victory to the Devi.”

तृषुवुस्तां तदा देवीं दुमुंखे नितर्धेमतः ।

पुष्पवृष्टि तथा चक्रवैर्याद्ध नभःस्थितः ॥ ४ १ ॥

When Durmukha was slain, the Immortals from the celestial space began to chant praises and hymns to the Devi, showered down flowers on Her head and gave shouts of “Victory to the Devi.”

त्रिष्य: सिद्धान्यर्वर्न: सिद्धायर्यकित्रनः ।

जद्धुस्तं हतं दृष्ट्वा दानवं रणमतकरः ॥ 5० ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्के

त्रयोद्योअयगः ॥ 1 7 3 ॥

The Rsjs, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, and Kinnaras all became very glad to see the Demon dead on the field.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book

on the killing of Bāskala and Durmukha in

Śrimaddevithāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam, of

18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XIV

On the Killing of Tāmra and Ciksura

व्यास उवाच

दूरपुरं निर्त हंभात महिष: क्रोधभूषितः ।

उवाच दानवान्सर्वान्कि जातमिति चास्यकृत् ॥ । ॥

निर्हती दानवीं गृत्री रणो दुरुपुंखाक्कली ।

तन्या तत्परामाशयं पश्यंतु देखचेष्टितम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing the death news of

Book V Chapter XIV

Durmukha, Mahisāsura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly to the Dānavas “O! What is this? What is this?” Alas! That delicate woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Bāskala! Lo! Now look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate).

कालो हि बलवान्क्ता सततं सुखदुःखये ।

नरणां परन्त्याणां पुण्यपापानुयोगतः ॥ 3 ॥

It is the acts virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the powerful Time awards pleasure or pain accordingly.

निर्ती दानवश्रेष्ठी किं कतल्यमतः परम् ।

ब्रुवंतु मिलिताः सर्वे यदुक्तं कार्यसूब्द्धे ॥ ४ ॥

The two powerful Demons are killed; what are we to do now? You all judge and say what is reasonable at this critical juncture.

एवं बुवर्ति राजेन्द्र महिषे5तिजलात्पिते ।

चिक्षुगाखस्तु सेनानीसमुजाच महारवः ॥ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: When the powerful Mahisa said thus, his general Cikṣura, the great warrior spoke as follows:

राजर्श हनियाभि का चिन्ता क्षीविहिंसने ।

इत्युक्ता स्वबलैयुक्तः प्रययौ राथसंवृत्तः ॥ 6 ॥

“O King! Why are you so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I will kill Her, thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his chariot and accompanied by his own army.

द्वितीयं पाणिगाई तु कृत्वा ताथं महावलम् ।

महता सैन्याधेण प्र्ययनगनं द्विगः ॥ ७ ॥

The powerful Tāmra accompanied him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with the clamour of their vast army.

नागारछंतमालोक्य देवी भगवती शिजा ।

चकार शड़ज्याधोष घटानादं महाद्रतुम् ॥ 8 ॥

तत्रमुस्तेन शब्देन ते च सर्वे सुरारयः ।

किमेतेदिति भाषेतो दुबुकुर्षयकामिता: ॥ 9 ॥

The auspicious Devi Bhagavati saw them before Her and She made an extraordinarily wonderful sound with Her conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The Asuras

heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each other “What is this?”

चिश्रास्यस्तु तान्टूद्वा पलाययपरायणान् ।

उवाचातीव संकुढ़ः किं भयं चः समापतनम् ॥ 10 ॥

The Cikşurākṣa seeing them turning their backs, told them very angrily “O Dānavas! What fear has now overcome you?

अष्टीवाई सृत्यिषय पालीर्जालां मदोजताम् ।

तिश्छतव भयं त्यक्त्वा दैत्या: समरमूर्धीन ॥ 1 1 ॥

I will slay today this vain woman in the battle with arrows; so you should quit your fear and remain steady in battle.

श्रुत्यक्त्या दानवश्रेक्षायपाणिकार्लानित्यः ।

आपात्य संगरे देदीमित्युबान सातध्यः ॥ 1 2 ॥

Thus saying, the Dānava Chieftain Cikṣura came fearlessly before the Devi with bows and arrows in his hands and, accompanied by his army, angrily spoke thus:

किं गर्जसि विशालासिंध भीयवन्तीताश्रान् ।

नाहं विषीम तत्वांगि शुवा तेउडा विवेष्टितम् ॥ 13 ॥

सीयोदे दूषणं जाला तवैवाकीर्तिसभ्यम् ।

उपेक्षां कुन्ते विचर्भ मदीयं यामतोचने ॥ 14 ॥

"O Thou of large and broad eyes! Why are you roaring to terrify the weak persons! O the Soft-limbed One! I have heard all about your deeds but I am not a bit afraid of You." O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of disgrace, rather sin, to kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to pass over this act, (does not like to do it, if my purpose be served without it).

क्रीणां युद्धं कताईशु तथा हावैशु सुन्दरि ।

न सशैर्विवहितं क्वापि त्वापुरीना कदाचन ॥ 15 ॥

O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and amorous gestures, but I have never heard a woman like your coming to fight with arms and weapons.

पुर्येरपि न योद्धव्यं किं पुनर्निंशिणीतः शरैः ।

भवापुरीनां देहेषु दुर्जोग मातनीतदन् ॥ 16 ॥

Even the delicate flowers, Malati, etc., cause pain on the bodies of beautiful women like you;

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

so it is not advisable to fight against you with flowers even; what to speak of sharpened arrows!

धित्रजन मानुषे लोक क्षात्यभानुजीविनाम् ।

लतितोतः पिंयो देहः कुन्नीभः शितः शैः: ॥ 17 ॥

Fie on those who spend their lives according to the Kṣatriya Dharma! Oh! Who can praise that Dharma which allows this dear body of ours to be pierced by sharpened arrows?

तैल्यभ्यौ: पुथवातैल्णा मिहाङ्गभोजनैः ।

पोषितोज्यं प्रियो देहो घानतीय: पोर्षुभि: ॥ 18 ॥

This dear body is nourished by sweet food, by being smeared with oil, and by smelling the scents of beautiful flowers.

देईं हित्वाजिस्याराभिर्धनभुज्याते नर: ।

प्रिधानं दुःखदं पूर्वै पश्रातिक सुखदं भवेत् ॥ 19 ॥

Ought, then, one to destroy it by arrows from an enemy? Men get their bodies pierced by arrows and then become rich. Now is it possible for the riches to give pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains in the beginning?

स्वभयत्रैव सामोके युद्धमाकांक्षे सये :।

सुखं संभोगैतं व्यक्त्वा के गुणं वैलिसे संगरे ॥ 20 ॥

Even if this be so, fie on those riches! O Beautiful One! It seems you are not intelligent; why have you desired to fight instead of to enjoy sexual pleasure. O beautiful! What merits have you found in the battle that you have chosen this. खद्यात गदायाते भेदं च शिलीमुखैः ।

प्रगान्ते तु संस्कारो गोपायमुपखकर्णम् ॥ 21 ॥

Where you see the action of the axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, jackals come and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you been able to trace out in these things!

तस्यैव कविभियूर्ि: कृतं चारीव शंसनम् ।

रगे मृतानां स्व:गतिरत्यक्षितदोस्ति केलतः ॥ 22 ॥

It is only those cunning poets that praise these; they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! O Beautiful! Those sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries.

तस्मादगच्छ वरातोहे यत्र ने रामते मनः ।

भज वा भूपतिं नारं हवारि सुरमदन् ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore, O Excellent One! Go away anywhere else you like; or accept this king Mahisa, the tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.

एवं बुबाणं ते दैत्यं प्रोवाच जगद्धिका ।

किं भूग भावसे मुंह बुद्दिमानिय चपिछ्तः ॥ 24 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Dānava Cikṣura speaking thus, the Divine Mother addressed him thus: O Stupid! Why are you speaking false words, having no significance, like a literary man giving out mere words only?

नौतिशास्वं न जानासे विद्यां चावीक्षकों तथा ।

न सेवितात्मव्या वृद्धा न धर्मे मतिरित्त ते ॥ 25 ॥

मूढ़ीसेवापरो यस्मात्ममान्चं मूर्षे एल हि ।

राजधर्म न जानासि किं ब्रवीषि समात्रतः ॥ 26 ॥

You do not know anything of politics, ethics, metaphysics; you serve illiterate and stupid; therefore, you are also a first class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal duties; then what are you speaking before me?

संग्रामे महिषे हत्ता कृत्वा कधिरकर्दमम् ।

यश:सत्मयं स्थिंरं कृत्वा गतिय्यामि यवासुखम् ॥ 27 ॥

देवानां दुःखदातारं दानवं मदगवितम् ।

हनिष्येड़ं दुराचारं युद्धे कृम स्थिते भव ॥ 28 ॥

I will kill that Mahisāsura in battle, make the soil muddy with his blood, thus establish firmly My pillar or Fame and then go happily to My abode. Surely will I slay that vain vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. Better fight steadily.

जीवितेच्छाजित चेन्मुद महिष्य तथा तत्व ।

तदा गच्छेतु पातालं दानवाः सर्वे एव ते ॥ 29 ॥

मुभूर्ण यदि यक्षिते युद्धं कुर्वर्ति सत्वतः ।

सर्वानेव वधिष्यामि निशयोःयं माभ्यान् ॥ 30 ॥

O Stupid! Better go to Patāla with all the Dānavas, if you and Mahisa desire to live any longer. And if you like to go unto death, then be ready fight without any delay; I will slay you all; this is My firm resolve.

Book V Chapter XIV

यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य दान्वो बलदार्यितः ।

भुभोच वाणवृष्टि तां घनवृष्टिमिवापगम् ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava, proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her.

चिच्छेट तस्य सा बाणान्वबाणर्पिशितेतत ।

ज्यान तं तथा घोरोराशिवसदीः शरैः ॥ ३२ ॥

The Devi cut off those arrows into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him dreadful arrows like poisonous snakes,

युद्धे परमर्भ तत्र बभूव विस्मयप्रदम ।

गदया घातयामास तं रथाजगदीविका ॥ ३३ ॥

Then their fight became astounding to the public; the Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her club so much that he fell down from his chariot.

मूर्षे प्राप स दुहाया गद्याउभित्तो भूग्ग ।

मुह्त्रदयमात्रं तु रथोपस्य ईवाचलः ॥ 34 ॥

That vicious demon, thus struck by the club, remained senseless near to his chariot for two muhūrtas, fixed like a mountain.

तं तथा मृक्तिं दृष्ट्या तापः परवलातः ।

आजगाम रणे योद्धं चीढ़कां प्रति चापलत ॥ 35 ॥

आगच्छंतु तु तं वीक्ष्य हसनी प्राप चीढ़का ।

एषहीि दानवश्रेष्ठ यमलोकं नयाम्यहम् ॥ 36 ॥

Tāmra, the tormentor of the foes, seeing him thus, could not remain steady and came forward to fight with Candjikā. The Devi, seeing him laughed and said “O Dānava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you unto death.”

किं भवपिद्रुः समावातैरबलैषुः गतायुषेः ।

महिषः किं गृहे घुकः करोति जीवनोषधम् ॥ 37 ॥

Or, what is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you can be called lifeless. What is that stupid Mahisa doing now? Is he thinking out the way to save his life?

किं भवद्धिद्रतैर्यैर्मानपि विफकलः शमः ।

अत्ते महेषे घाये सुरुगजी दुरात्मिन ॥ 38 ॥

You all are too weak; no use in killing you, all my arrows will go in vain, if that wicked Mahisa, the enemy of the gods, be not slain.

तस्मायुं गृहं नाला महिंक्षे प्रेयचित्व ।

पश्येनां सोडपि मन्त्यात यादुर्गी ततुर्गी सिंहात्म। ॥ ३९ ॥

Therefore, do you go to your home and send here your king Mahiṣa. I am staying here in that form in which that wicked one likes very much to see Me.

तापस्तद्धनं शुत्वा बाणवृष्टि चकार है ।

चिडकां प्रति कोपेने कर्णाक्हणसानः ॥ ४ ० ॥

Hearing Her words, Tāmra became very angry and drawing his bow up to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Candjā Devī.

भगवत्य पितामक्षी समाकृष्य शासनम् ।

बाणानुभोच तरसा हन्तुकामा सुरावित् ॥ 4 1 ॥

The Bhagavatī, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and drawing Her bow began to shoot arrowing quickly at the demon, wishing to kill, as early as possible, the enemy of the gods.

चिद्याग्राओंपि बलवान्मूर्ण तयक्नोचित्य: पुनः।

गृहीत्वा सगरं चापं तस्थी ततस्ममुखः क्षणात् ॥ 4 2 ॥

In the meanwhile, Cikṣura regained his senses, and taking up again his bow in an instant, came before the Devi.

चिद्यात्यस्थ तामस्थ द्वाव्यतिवलोक्तटी ।

युयुधते महावीरी सह देया रणारिणे ॥ 4 3 ॥

Then Cikṣura and Tāmra, the two valiant warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devi.

कुविता च महामाया ववर्ष गरसांतिन् ।

चक्रात दानवान्सर्वानाण्डस्ततुच्छदान् ॥ 4 4 ॥

Mahā Māyā then, became very angry and began to hurl arrows after arrows so incessantly that all the armour of all the Dānavas became pierced and were cut down to pieces.

असुरा: क्रीयसम्मुजा बम्बुरु: शरताडिता: ।

चिश्विपुः शरजालानि देर्वी प्रति रुचपात्वि: ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Asuras, thus pierced by arrows, became infuriated with anger and hurled angrily a network of arrows upon the Devi.

बभूते राक्षसास्त्र किंगुका इव पुष्पिणः ।

शिलीमुखक्षतः सर्वे वसते च वने गे ॥ 46 ॥

The Dānavas, thus struck with sharp arrows and filled with cuts and wounds looked like the red Kīmśuka flowers in the spring.

बभूव तुमुलं युद्धं ताप्रेण सह संयुगे ।

विस्मयं परमं जमुदैवा ये प्रेक्षकाः स्थिताः ॥ 47 ॥

The fight then grew so severe between Tāmra and Bhagavati that the seers, the Devas, were all struck with wonder.

तापी मुसलमादाय लोहजं दारुणं दुबम् ।

जघान मस्तके सिंहं जहास च नददं च ॥ 48 ॥

नद्मानं नदा तं तु दूर्ध्वा देवी भ्वाप्तिज्ञा ।

खद्वेगेन शिलाधोग्य शिर्धिश्छेदे सदसा ॥ 49 ॥

Tāmra struck on the head of the lion with his dreadful hard Mūsala (club) made of iron, and laughed and shouted aloud. Seeing him thus vociferating, the Devi became angry and cut off his head by her sharp axes in no time.

छिडे शिरसि तामस्तु विशीर्षो मुसली बली ।

वधाम क्षणमात्रं तु परात तरणमस्तेक १ ५० ॥

The head being thus severed from the body, Tāmra, though headless, for a moment turned round his Mūsala and then fell down on the ground. परितत तामपातोल्क्य चिक्षुराख्यो महावलः ।

खडूरामादाय तस्या दुत्राव चण्डिकां प्रति ॥ 51 ॥

भगवत्यपि ते दूद्वा खडूरापाणिभुपगतात् ।

दानयं पश्चभिवर्गीर्जान तस्या रणे ॥ 52 ॥

The powerful Cikṣura, seeing Tāmra thus falling down, instantly took up his axe and ran

after Candikā. Seeing Cikṣura with axe in his hand, the Bhagavatī quickly shot at him five arrows.

एकेन पत्तितं खडूगं द्वितीयेन तु तत्कर: ।

कणठाच्य मनकं ततय कृतिनतं चापरै: སྐོད་ ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། ། །

With one arrow, his axe was cut down, with the second arrow his hands were cut and with the remaining ones his head was severed from his body.

एवं तौ निर्तही कृरौ राक्षसौ रणदुपंदौ ।

भन मैन्ध तयोत्पूर्ण दिश्वु संरसलमानसम् ॥ 54 ॥

Thus when the two cruel! warriors were slain, their soldiers soon fled away in terror in all directions.

देवाधु मृत्रितः सर्वे दृष्टवा तो निर्तीत रोगे ।

पुष्पवृष्टि मुदा चक्रज्वगस्त्वं नभः स्थिताः ॥ 55 ॥

The Devas were exceedingly glad at their downfall and showered gladly flowers from the sky and uttered shouts of Victory to the Devi.

क्रश्यो देयान्यर्वां वैलातः सिद्धाराणाः ।

कचुसे जय देविति चाधिकेति पुनः पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पड़ामकरभ्रे

वन्द्रदीशोक्षायः ॥ 14 ॥

The Rşis, Gandharvas, the Vetālas, the Siddhas and Čāranas were all very glad and began to utter repeatedly “O Goddess! Victory, victory be Yours.”

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing of Tāmra and Ciksura in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsā.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XV

On the Slaying of Bidjalākṣa and Asilomā

यास उवाच

तौ तया निह्तौ शुत्वा महिषो विस्मयान्वतः ।

प्रेययामास दैतेयांस्तद्धार्थं महात्बलान् ॥ १ ॥

असिलोमपिब्डाताबम्पमुखान्. युद्धुदम्बित् ।

सै-येन महत युक्तान्यायुधान्यपरिच्छिदान् ॥ 2 ॥

ते तत्र ददूर्दैर्वीं सिंहस्योपरि संस्थिताम् ।

अशदाशुभुजां दिव्यां खड्गखेटकधारिणीम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the Devi, Mahisāśura became very much amazed and sent the powerful Asilomā and Bidālāksa and the other Dānavas to the battle to kill the Devi. The Dānavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched out for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and

Book V Chapter XV

well attended by vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine Mother with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes and shields in Her hands.

असिलोमाउगतो गत्वा तामुवाच ह्स्त्रिक्ष

विन्यावन्तः शगान्तो देवीं दैत्यवधोत्तात् ॥ 4 ॥

The calm-tempered Asilomā appeared before the Devi ready to kill the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said:

असिलोमोवाच

देवि बूहि वच: सत्यं किमर्थसिंह सुन्दरि ।

आगतासि किम्बवं वा हिंस दैवास्त्रियगमः ॥ 5 ॥

O Devi! Why have You come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? O Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with you.

कारण कथायदा त्वं त्वया सक्यं करोम्यस् ।

काछ्जं मणिरलातिन भाजपातिन वराशि च ॥ 6 ॥

Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things that you like and retire from the field as early as passible.

यानीच्छसि वरातोहे गृहीत्वा गच्छ माधिसम् ।

किमर्थं युद्धकामासि दुःखसन्तापवर्धनम् ॥ ७ ॥

Why do you like this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say that it leads to the destruction of all happiness.

कवयवित्त महात्मानो युद्धं सर्वसुखापदम् ।

कोमपेजरीत ते देहे पुर्णापातासहे भुगम् ॥ ८ ॥

Your body is very delicate; it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you suffering the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much puzzled to think these things.

क्रियर्ष शाखसंपातानसहीति विरितिमये ।

बागुदीयर फलं शगत्ति: सततं सुखावेयनम् ॥ ९ ॥

See! The cleverness is judged when peace is the result thereof; for it leads always to happiness.

तकिषायं दुःखहुर्ने संग्रामं कर्तिमिष्ठसि ।

संसारोउ सुरुं प्राहुं दुःखं हेयमिति स्थिति: ॥ १० ॥

Then why are you liking to fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. Happiness is only

to be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the rule.

तत्सुंई त्रिविंध प्रोक्ते निव्यानित्यप्रभेदतः।

आमजानं सुखं नित्यमनित्वं भोगतं स्युतम् ॥ १ ॥ ॥

O Devi! That happiness is again of two kinds: Permanent and transitory. The pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of Ātmaṇjāna is permanent and that which is derived from enjoyments is transitory; these who know truly the Veda Śāstra, they avoid this transitory pleasure of enjoyments.

नाशामकं तु तत्यायं वेदग्राहाश्रियैतकैः ।

सौगतानां मतं चेत्वं त्वीकरोयि वरानने ॥ १२ ॥

तथापि यौवनं प्राप्य भुघ्व भोगान्तुसान् ।

पताकीकस्य सन्देहो यदि तेस्ति कुणोदिरि ॥ 13 ॥

If you follow the opinion of the Mimānśasakas and do not believe in the existence of future births, even then you ought not to fight; when you have got this youthful age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures in this world. O One of lean stomach!

स्वर्गभोगपरा नित्यं भव भाभिमि भृतले ।

अनित्य यौवनं दैहे झालेति सुकृतं चोर्त ॥ 14 ॥

And if you doubt in the existence of the other worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from fighting and perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the attainment of Heavens.

परोपतपर्नं कार्य वर्जनीयं सदा बुद्धे: ।

असिरोधेन कतिथ्यं धर्मार्थकामसेवन् ॥ १५ ॥

This fully developed womanhood is transient; knowing this do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid tormenting others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to Dharma, Artha and Kāma.

तस्मामपि कत्थापि माते धर्मे सदा कुः ।

अपराध विंना दैत्यान्क्मवानारयसेप्रिक्के ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You also things virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these Daityas without any cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the lives again of all are dependent on Truth.

दया धार्मिक्य देहोर्सित सने प्राणा: प्रकीर्तिता:।

तस्माद्या तथा सत्यं रक्षणीयं सदा बुधैः ॥ 17 ॥

कारणं चद सुश्रोगि दानवानां चधे तव ।

Therefore the sages always preserve piety, mercy and Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what is the use in Your killings these Demons? Please say explicitly on this point.

देव्यग्राव

त्वया पृष्ट महाबाहो किमर्थमित्व चागता ॥ 18 ॥

तन्दे समप्रवक्षापि हनने च प्रयोजनम् ।

The Devi said: O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here and why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the above points.

विवरापि सदा दैत्य सर्वलोकेषु सर्वदा ॥ 19 ॥

व्यायायीचे च पृतानां पृथसी साक्षिक्षिपि ।

O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go about all over the world, seeing the justices and injustices done by the several souls there.

न मे कदापि भोपोच्छा न लोगेने न च वैहिता ॥ 20 ॥

धार्यार्थ विचाराययर संसारे साधुरक्षणम् ।

Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, nor have I greed for anything, nor have I enmity with any creature.

त्रतमितनुं नियतं पालयामि निजं सदा ॥ 21 ॥

सामुन्ता रक्षणं कार्य हन्तवा येप्रमाधावः ।

Only to preserve the virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, I roam over the worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To preserve the good and to put down the evil doers is My duty.

देवरसंक्षणं कार्यमवतारैरेनेकशः ॥ 22 ॥

युगे युगे तानेवाहामवताराभिर्भरिं च ।

Many Avañaras are to take their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to preserve the Vedas; therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after yugas.

महिषस्तु दुराचारो देवान्वे हृतुमुचतः ॥ 23 ॥

ज्ञात्याई नदायार्थ भोः प्राणात्रिय ताक्षसामुना ।

Now the wicked Mahisa is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing this, I have come hereto kill him.

तं हनिष्ये दुराचारं सुरग्रुं महावलम् ॥ 24 ॥

गच्छ वा तिष कामं ल्व सत्यमेदनुदाहून।

I tell you verily that I will slay that vicious powerful Mahisāsura, the enemy of the gods. Knowing this, you remain a depart, as you desire. बूहि वा ते दुरात्मानं राजानं महिषीस्तुम् ॥ 25 ॥

किमान्यान्येषयस्य स्वयं युद्धे कुरूब ह ।

Or you can go to Mahisa, that impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending other Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight.

सन्धिकृत्पमिछास्त सित्त जास्तव मया सह ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वे गछन्तु पालातं वैरं तवक्ता यथासुतम् ।

If your king likes to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas and go down to the Patāla.

देवद्रव्यं तु यक्स्विवद्भुतं जित्वा रोण सुतम् ॥ 27 ॥

तदाचा यान्तु पातालं प्रकृदो वयं तिहिति ।

Let him return to the Devas whatever he has taken perforce from them and go to the Patāla, where Prahlāda is residing.

व्यास उवाच

तद्धृत्वा वचनं देख्या अस्तिलोमा पुरःस्थिता ॥ 28 ॥

विद्वालासं महावीरं पघ्छ्छ प्रीतिपुर्वेकम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the Devi's words, Asilomā asked gladly, before the Devi, the powerful Asura Bidālākshya:

अस्तिलोगोवाच

शुतं तेउढ विडालाक्षयं भवान्यां कवितं च चत् ॥ 29 ॥

एवं गते किं कर्त्वोय विग्रहः सन्धिरेव वा ।

Well, Būjalāksya! You have heard just now all what the Devi has said; now are we to observe treaty for declare war. What are we to do under the circumstances?

विश्वालाक्य उवाच

न सन्धिकामोर्स नृयोर्भिमानी

युढ़े न मृत्युं निवर्त हि जान्न ।

दृष्टा हातान्येरत तथाउस्मादैवं

है कॉंसितक्रमितुं समर्धेः ॥ 30 ॥

Book V Chapter XV

Bidālāksya said: Our king knows full well that his death will certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is not willing to make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him daily the deaths of the Dānavas and still he has sent us to battle. Who can overcome the destiny?

“दुः:साध्य एवारित्वर् सेवकानां

धर्मे: सदा मानविवर्लितानाम् ।

आज्ञापरणां बशवर्तिकानां

पाझ्ञालिकानामिव सूत्रभेदात् ॥"

गत्वा ककं तस्य पुरस्त्वया च

मयास्पि वक्च्यमिदं कठोरण ॥ 31 ॥

The duty of a servant is a very difficult one; he will have to be always submissive and obedient, without caring the least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing dolls are completely under the hands of the actors and their movements vary according to the pulling of the wires employed in making them dance.

गच्छन्तु पातालमितघ सर्वे

दन्वास्य रन्तानि धर्न सुराणण ।

"प्रियं हि वक्तव्यमसत्येवेन न

च प्रियं स्यादितकृतु चाणितम् ॥

सत्यं प्रियं नो भवतीह कामं

मौनं तते बुद्धिमतां प्रतिश्छिन् ।”

न फल्यावक्येः प्रतिविधानीयो

राजा तु वैरिसिति नीतिशासून् ॥ 32 ॥

How can we then go to our master and say hard words as he would give away to the Devas all the gems and jewels and go down to Pātāla with other Dānavas. One considers it one's duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial words are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to remain silent.

न नूनं तर मतन्थं हितं वा वकुमाद्वात् ।

ग्रुं बार्थि गते राजा कोयपुको भविष्यति ॥ 33 ॥

Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by useless words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go and advise our king

with eagerness what is best or to ask advice from him about such things; the king would then certainly be very angry.

इति सच्छित्य कल्लेय युद्ध प्राणस्य संशये ।

स्वामिकार्य परं मत्वा मरणं तृणतस्था ॥ 34 ॥

Therefore we ought to do our duties to the king, even if our lives be at stake. To consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our king are what is best for us.

व्यास उवाच

इति सर्किष्य ती वीरी संस्थिती युद्धतत्परी ।

धनुबाणधारी तत्र सत्रद्वी रथसङ्गती ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then wore their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows and arrows in their hands, became ready for fight.

प्रधाने तु बिडालाश्म: सन दाणानुमोगेश ह ।

असिलोगा स्थितो दूरे प्रेशकः परमाखिति ॥ 36 ॥

First Bādālāksya shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asilomā stood aloof at a distance as a mere witness.

चिछ्छेते तांतधा प्राप्तानीवका खशैर: शगान ।

विद्वालायं त्रिभिबार्णीज्ञान च शिलाहिति: ॥ 37 ॥

The Divine Mother cut off those arrows to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and then shot at Bādālāksya three arrows sharpened on stone.

ग्राय वाण्याध्यां दैत्य: पपात समारांगे ।

मृहितो5ध ममारगरु दानवो दैवयोगतः ॥ 38 ॥

The demon Bādālāksya fell sensless by these arrows on the battlefields and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate.

बिडालाशूं हर्ते बृद्धवा रणे शक्तिशाल्यतः ।

असिलोमा धनुष्याणि: संश्वितो युद्धतपर: ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing Bādālakṣya thus dead, Asilomā took up his bows and arrows and came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said briefly, thus:

क्रधै सक्यं करं कृत्ता तानुशच चिन्ते वचः ।

देवि ज्ञानामि मरणं दानवानां दुरात्मनाम् ॥ 40 ॥

तथापि युद्धं कतैलं पराधीनेन वे मया ।

महिषो मन्दयुद्धिक्र त्र नाजाति प्रियाधिके ॥ 4 1 ॥

"O Devi! I know that death is inevitable to the Dānavas; still I am ready to fight; for I am dependent; and Mahiṣa is of very dull intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what is really good and what is merely pleasant.

तद्यो नैव कत्क्यं हितं चैवाधिरमं मा ।

मतैवं वीरधर्मेण शुभं वा.प्यशुभं भवेत ॥ 42 ॥

दैवमेव परं मये धिक्यौकसमयकम् ।

पत्नित दानवास्तूर्ण तव जाणहता भृति ॥ 43 ॥

I will never speak before him unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life in the battlefield than advise him anything, be that auspicious or inauspicious.

इतुल्बता शाख्यिं स चकार दानवोतमः ।

देवी चिच्छेते तान्वाणीरुपातंति निजानिति ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Dānavas are being killed no sooner they are shot at by your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all.

अन्यैर्विष्याथ तं तृणमिसलोमानगायूरैः ।

बीक्षिताप्रमरसैधुः कोपपुणान्ना तदा ॥ 4 5 ॥

गुर्णुः दानवः कामं बाणैर्वेब्रतुः किल ।

स्ववुद्धीयधारः स प्रपुस्तः किंगुको यथा ॥ 46 ॥

Prowess does not lead to any success; Fie on one's prowess! Thus saying, the Demon began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devi; the Devi, too, cut them to pieces with Her own arrows before they came to Her; and, becoming angry, soon pierced him with arrows. The Devas witnessed this sight from above.

असिलोमा गदां गुर्वीं लौहीमुचाय्य वेगतः ।

दूराव चीछकां कोपालिंस्ते भूर्टि जघान द ॥ 4७ ॥

The body of the Demon was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial Kinśuka tree.

सिंहोपि नखत्थातैस्तं द्वारा भुर्जाते ।

अगणस्य गदायातं कृते तेन बलीयास ॥ 48 ॥

Asilomā then lifted aloft his heavy iron club

and ran after Candikā and hurt the lion on his head with anger.

उत्पल तत्सा दैत्यो गदायाणिः सुदारुणिः ।

सिंहमूर्दिन समाकष्ठ जायन गदायांबिकाम् ॥ 49 ॥

Not caring at all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the lion tore asunder his arms with his claws.

कृतं तेन प्रहारं तु वढ्यस्चा विश्रापणे ।

खदुरेन शिताधोगेश गिरिश्छ्छेद कण्ठतः ॥ 50 ॥

Then that dreadful Demon leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit the Devi very hard.

छिले शिरसि दैलेन्द्र: परपात तरसा शिता।

हाहाकारो महानासीलैन्ये तस्य दुरात्मनः ॥ 51 ॥

O King! The Devi, then, baffled the hit and cut off the Demon's head with Her sharp axe.

जय देवीति देवतानं त्रुहुर्षुर्गवाद्विकवाम ।

देवदुवुभयो नेतुर्गुश्र नृप किकराः ॥ 52 ॥

The head being thus severed, the Demon was thrown on the ground with great force; seeing this, a general cry of distress arose among his soldiers.

मित्तो दानवी वीध्य पतितो च राजांगो ।

निह्ता: सैनिका: सर्वे तत्र केसरीणा बलात् ॥ 53 ॥

The Devas shouted aloud “Victory to the Devi” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas resounded and the Gandharvas began to dance in great joy.

भक्षिताक्ष तथा केचित्रिज्ञेशं तरुणं कृमम् ।

भन्ना: केचित्रता मन्दा महिंधं प्रति दुःखिता ॥ 54 ॥

Seeing the two Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed some of the remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up others, and made the battle field void of any persons. Some fled away in great distress to Mahisāsura.

चुकुगू कनुदृष्टि जाहि जाहिति भाषणैः ।

असिलोमविद्धालाख्यौ निर्हती नृपसत्तम ॥ 5 5 ॥

अन्ये ये सैनिका राजन्सिद्धेन भक्षिताश्रु ते ।

एवं बुबन्तो राजानं तदा चक्रकु शेजम्मू ॥ 56 ॥

The fugitives began to cry aloud “Save us, save us” and said, “O King! Asilomā and Bīdalākṣya

Book V Chapter XVI

are both slain; and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by the lion." Thus they told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire distress.

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तेषां महिषो रुर्मनास्तदा ।

वधूव चित्ताकृलितो विमान दुःखसंयुतः ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्रमकक्रचे

पडवशो3ध्याः: 11 15 11

Hearing their words, Mahisa became absent minded through pain and grief and began to think over the matter with great anxiety.

Here ends the Filteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of Bídalākṣa and Asilomā in

Srimaddevithbagavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XVI

CHAPTER XVI

On the Conversation Between the Devi and Mahisa

व्यास उवाच

तेषां तद्वचनं शुत्वा क्रोधयुक्तो नराधिपः ।

दारूकं प्रह तत्सा रथमानय मेउद्धतुम्म ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahisa in anger addressed the charioteer Darūka: “Bring over my chariot quickly.

सहस्वखरसंयुक्ते पताकाध्वजभूषितम् ।

आयुधै: संसुतं शुधं सुचकं चाकुबक्रम ॥ २ ॥

That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is bedecked with banners flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white colour, and beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.”

सूतोर्धि रथमानीर तमुवाच रत्यान्चितः ।

राजत्रवोउभ्यानीते हारि तिहिति भूषितः ॥ ३ ॥

The charioteer brought the chariot instantly and duly informed the king “O King! I have got the chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, bedecked with beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.”

सर्वायुधसमयुक्तो वरास्तरणसंयुक्तः ।

आनीर्ति तं रवं जात्वा दानवेंत्रे महावक्तः ॥ 4 ॥

मानुषं देहामस्थाय संग्रामं गन्तुमुढ़तः ।

विवायं मतसा चेति देवी मां प्रेक्ष्य दुर्भुंबम् ॥ 5 ॥

श्रूष्टिभं महिंचं नूनं विमता सा भविष्यत् ।

Hearing that the chariot had been brought, Mahīsa thought, the Devi might not care him, seen him ugly faced with a pair of horns and therefore

decided to assume a human shape and then go to the battle.

नारीणा च प्रिंयं रूपं तथा चातुर्यमित्यपि ॥ 6 ॥

तस्मादूर्षे च चातुर्यं कृत्वा यास्यामि तां प्रति ।

The beauty and cleverness are the delights of women; therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with all the cleverness and dexterities.

यथा मां दीक्ष्य सा बाला प्रेमयुक्ता भविष्यति ॥ 7 ॥

मामपि च तदैव स्थान्युखं नान्यस्करणतः ।

For I will never be delighted with anything but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming passionately attached to me.

इति संचित्य मनसा दानवेत्रो महाकानः ॥ 8 ॥

त्यक्तन्त नात्राहिंरं कर्णे बधून पुरुषः शुभः ।

Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the buffalo appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape.

सर्वायुधधरः श्रीमांशुकापूर्णपृषितः ॥ 9 ॥

विद्यार्थरर: कान्त: पुरुषबाण इवारपर: ।

He put on beautiful ornaments, armpilates, etc., and wore divine clothes and had garlands on his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, the god of Love.

रथोपथितः केयुरस्वर्यी बाणधन्धर्धः ॥ १० ॥

सेनापरिवृत्तो देईी जगाम मदागर्वितः ।

Taking, then, all the arrows and weapons, he mounted on the chariot, and, attended by his army, went to the Devi, elated with power and vanity.

मनोजं रूपमास्थाय मानिनीनां मनोहाम् ॥ १ १ ॥

तमागतं समालोक्य दैत्यनामधिरं नतं ।

बहुधिः संवृतं वीरैदेंकी शकुमवादत् ॥ १ २ ॥

The Devi blew Her conchshell when She saw Mahisāsura, the lord of the Dānavas, come before Her with a handsome appearance, tending to captivate the minds of mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and valiant warriors.

स शकुनिन्दं शूला जनविस्यवाकरम् ।

समीयमेवत देल्यातु तान्यावच हास्विक १ १ ३ १

देवि संसारचक्रेश्मवर्तीमानो जनः किल ।

नरो वास्य तथा नारी सुखं वांछिति सर्वथा ॥ १४ ॥

The King of the Demons heard the blow of the conchshell, wondrous to all, came up before the Devi and smilingly spoke to Her thus: O Devi! Whatever person there exists in this world, this wheel of Saṃsāra (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she a man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or happiness.

सुखं संयोगेनं नृणां नासंयोगे भवेदित्र ।

संयोगो बढुधा भिवस्तान्ब्यीनि श्युपाव है ॥ 15 ॥

And that pleasure is derived in this world by the combination of persons with each other; never is it seen where this combination is absent.

भेदानुभूगितितृत्यान्वभावोल्याननेकशः ।

तत्र प्रीतिभवानादौ कंश्वामि यथागति ॥ 16 ॥

Again this combination is of various kinds; I will mention them; Hear. Union is of various kinds according as it arises out of affection or out of natural consequences. Of these, I will now speak of unions coming out of affection, as far as my understanding goes.

भातापिक्षेस्तु पुत्रेय संयोगस्तुभम: स्मृतः ।

श्रानुभांत्र तथा योगः कारणान्याधयो मतः ॥ 17 ॥

The union that comes between father, mother and their sons arises out of affection; it is therefore good. The union between brother and brother is middling, for mutual interests of give and take are there between the two.

उत्तमस्य सुखत्यैव दातुल्यातुतः स्मृतः ।

तस्मादत्यसुखत्यैव प्रदातुराच्च मध्यमः ॥ १ ८ ॥

In fact, that union is considered as excellent which leads to happiness of the best sort and that union which leads to lesser happiness is known as mediocre.

नाविकानां तु संयोगः स्मृतः स्थापाविकी बुधैः ।

विविधायतृतिचानां प्रसङूरपितर्किनात् ॥ 19 ॥

The union amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is known as natural. They come on various errands concerning their varied interests.

अत्यल्युखदानुत्वाकनिष्ठोउयं स्मृते बुधैः ।

अत्युत्तमसृ संयोगः संसारे सुखुःखदः ॥ 20 ॥

This combination, because it offers the least amount of happiness, is considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to best happiness.

नारीपुरुषयोः काने समानवयसोः सदा ।

संयोगे च: समाध्यातः स एवात्युभम: सूतः ॥ 21 ॥

O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of the very best sort.

अत्यनुभमसुख्यैव दातृत्वास तथायित्यः ।

चातुर्वीरूपवेषाठीः कुलशीरिनगुणैस्वा ॥ 22 ॥

Both the parties, men and women, are elevated when they want to excel each other in their family connections, qualities, beauty, cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of conduct.

परस्परस्मुतर्कः कक्षते हि परस्यम् ।

तं चेक्कारोषि संयोगे वीरोग च मया सह ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore, O Dear! If you establish with me that conjugal relation, you will get, no doubt, all the excellent happiness.

अत्यनमसुख्यवैय प्राप्ति: स्थाने न संशय: ।

नानाविधानि रूपाणि कापीय संवेख्या दिये ॥ 24 ॥

इंत्रदाय: सुर्गा: सर्वे संभावे विजिता मया ।

रत्नानि यानि दिव्यानि भवनेत्रसिन्यामानुना ॥ 25 ॥

भूंभृव त्वं तानि सर्वांशि यथेथे देवैल ता यथा ।

Specially I will assume different forms at my mere will. All the Divine jewels and precious things that I have acquired after defeating Indra

Book V Chapter XVI

and the other Devas in battle, and others are lying in my palace; you can enjoy all of them as my queen consort or you can make a charity of them as you like.

पूरानी भवाछ त्वं सोरोप्रम तव सुवृदि ॥ 26 ॥

वैर त्वजेउई देवैस्तु तव वाक्यात्र संगयः ।

यथा त्व सुखामानोषि त्वादुः कराविणि वे ॥ 27 ॥

O Beautiful One! I am your servant; consequently, at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with the Devas. In short, I will do anything that leads to your pleasure and happiness.

आतापय विशालाहित्र त्वादुः प्रकटीमय ।

चिनं मे तव रूपेण मोहितं चाकभाषिधि ॥ 28 ॥

आतुरोर्सिम वरातोहे प्राप्तसे शरणं किल ।

O Sweet speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted very much with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One having a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto You.

प्रपत्रं पात्रि रंभोक कामबाणीः प्रपीडितम् ॥ 29 ॥

धर्माणामुत्तमो धर्मः शरणागतस्थानम् ।

O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the arrows of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To protect one who has come under one's refuge is the best of all virtues.

त्वदीयोरम्यसितापरिग सेवकोउई कुशोदिर ॥ 30 ॥

मरानांतं चचः सत्वं नान्यथा प्रकतीमयहम् ।

O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender waist! I will spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as your obedient servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the risk even of my life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly.

पाटी नतोउसि तत्विं गत्वका नानायुघानि ते ॥ 31 ॥

द्वां कुक विजगतालिं तत्पोत्रि काममार्गीः ।

I now throw aside all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I am very much distressed by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou therefore shew Thy mercy on me.

जन्मप्रभृति चार्वीपि दैन्यं नाचरितं मया ॥ 32 ॥

बहादारीनीक्षागम्प्य त्वयि तिद्ध्यामवहम् ।

O Beautiful One! Never I showed my weakness to Brahmā and the other Devas; but today I acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahmā and others; they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battle-fields.

चरितं मम जान्तिन रणे बहादाय: सुतः ॥ 33 ॥

सोप्रधृते तत्सोस्मि ममुचं एपय भामिनि ।

But, O Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge myself as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy.

व्यास उवाच

इति बुवाणं तं दैत्वं देवी भगवती हिं सा ॥ 34 ॥

प्रहस्य सरित्यं वाक्ययुवाच करवर्गिनी ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, having said so, that beautiful Bhagavati laughed loudly and spoke smiling:

देवयुवाच

नाहं पुरुविध्छामि परमं पुरुचं विजा ॥ 35 ॥

तस्य चेच्छास्महं दैत्य सुवामि सकर्तं जगत् ।

स मां पर्यति विश्वाता तस्यहं प्रकृति: शिवा ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi said: I do not desire any other body than the Supreme One! O Demon! I am His Willpower; I therefore create all these worlds. I am His Śivā (auspicious) Prakṛti (Nature); That Universal Soul is seeing Mc.

तसासीध्यवगादेव चैतन्यं मायि शाशून् ।

जड़ाई तस्य संयोगातप्रभावीम सचेतना ॥ 37 ॥

अयक्रान्तस्य सारिष्याद्वसश्रेतना यथा ।

न प्राप्यसुखवांछा मे कदाचिद्वि जायते ॥ 38 ॥

It is owing to His proximity that I am appearing as the Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this Cosmos. As irons move owing to the proximity of magents, I, too, though inert, owing to His proximity, work consciously.

मूक्रीत्यासि मन्दामन् वस्त्रीसंगं चिकीर्मिति ।

नरस्य बक्यनाथीय मृंखला कथी प्रक्रांतिति ॥ 39 ॥

I do not desire to enjoy the ordinary pleasures;

Śrimaddevibhāgavaam

you are very dull and stupid; there is no doubt in this, when you desire sexual union. For women are considered as chains to hold men in bondage.

लौहकद्धोरि मुच्येत क्रीबढ़ो नैव मुच्येत ।

किमिष्ठसि च मन्तात्मनुसागारस्य सेवनम् ॥ 40 ॥

Men bound up by iron chains can obtain freedom at any time, but when they are fastened by woman, they can never obtain freedom. O Stupid! You now want to serve the source of urine, etc.

गर्भ कुरु सुखाय त्वं शमासुख्यावयसि ।

नारीसई महुःखं जानिके त्वं विमुहासि ॥ 4 1 ॥

Take refuge under Peace; peace will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from connection with women; you know this; then why are you deluded?

त्वज वैरं सुर्ः: सार्थं यथैंह विचारवानी ।

पातालं गच्छ वा कामं जीवितेच्छा यद्यस्ते ॥ 4 2 ॥

अथवा कुरं स्थांगं बलवत्यासि संग्रतम् ।

Better avoid your enmity with the Devas and roam over the world anywhere you like. Or, if you desire to live, go to Pātāla; or fight with Me. Know this for certain that I am stronger than you.

प्रेपितानई सुरैः सर्वस्वल नागाया दानव ~.43 ||

सत्यं वर्धायिं येनाच तस्या वचनसीहदम् ।

O Dānava! The Devas collected have sent Me here; I tell you this very truly; I am satisfied with you by your words of friendship; therefore dost thou fly away while you are living.

दर्शितं तेन तूषात्सि जीवनाल्य यथासुखम् ॥ 44 ॥

सतां सतपदीं भैत्री तेन मुंचामि जीवित･।

See! When words are uttered seven times amongst each other, friendship is established between saints.

मरणेच्छाशित चेषुद्धं कुर वीर यथासुखम् ॥ 45 ॥

हनिष्यामि महाबाहो त्यामहं नात्र संशयः ।

That has been done so amongst us; so there is friendship now between you and me; I won't take away your life. O hero! If you desire to die, fight gladly; O powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्या वचः शुत्वा दानवः काममोहितः ॥ 4 6 ॥

उवाच शल्भाया वाचा मधुरं वचनं ततः ।

विघेभ्यं वरारोहे त्वां प्रहर्तुं वरानने ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing the Bhagavati's words, the Dānava, deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet words: O Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof are very delicate and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady make one enchanted.

कोमलां चास्त्रवर्गी नारी नार्विमोहिन् ।

जित्वा हरित्याईश लोकपालांश सर्वेशः ॥ 48 ॥

किं तव्या सह युद्धं मे युक्तं कमललोचने ।

Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to strike against your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hari, Hara, the Lokapālas and the several other Devatās; I therefore ask whether it is proper for me to fight with you!

रोचते यदि चार्विंग विवाहं कुक मां पत्र ॥ 49 ॥

नोद्रहच्छ ययेहे ते ईंगे यस्मात्समागत ।

O Fair one! If you like, you marry and worship me, or you can return to your desired place whence you have come.

नाहं त्वां ग्रहर्थियां यतो मेत्री कृता त्वया ॥ 50 ॥

हितभुक्ते शुभं वाक्यं तस्मादुपच्छ यथासुद्यम् ।

You have declared friendship with me; I therefore do not like to strike any weapons on you. I have now spoken for your good and welfare. You can gladly go away.

का शोभा मे भवेदने ह्वा तां चालोरोचान् ॥ 51 ॥

स्वीहता बालहना च बहाहता दुरत्यया ।

O beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful eyes; what fame shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist! Murdering a woman, a child, and a Brāhmin certainly makes the murderer liable to suffer the consequences thereof.

गृहीता त्वां गृहं नूनं गच्छामध्य वरानने ॥ 52 ॥

तथापि मे फलं न स्वादुताद्वीमासुखं कुतः ।

I will certainly carry you to day to my place without killing you. If I use force to you, I will

Book V Chapter XVI

not get happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force leads to no happiness.

प्रद्वीमि सुकौरि त्वां तिवनावतन्ते यतः ॥ 53 ॥

पुरुषस्य सुखं न स्यातुते कानतामुखांबुजात् ।

O One having good hairs! I salute before you and speak that a man can not be happy without the lotus face of a woman; similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man's lotus face.

तत्थेव हि नारीगां तत्समाच पुरुधं विज्ञा ॥ 54 ॥

संयोगे सुखबम्पूतिविधोगे चुःखमम्बतः ।

Where comes off the good combination between these two, then the highest pitch of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the disjunction thereof.

कान्तात्सि रूपसम्पत्रा सर्वीभरणभूषिता ॥ 55 ॥

चातुर्व त्वयि किं नास्ति यतो मां न भवस्यहो ।

True that you are well decked with ornaments all over your body but you seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not worshipping me. Who has advised you to renounce enjoyments?

तवोपविद्धे केनेवं भोपानां परिवर्जन् ॥ 56 ॥

वढित्राउसि प्रियालये वैशिण केनिविर्चह ।

मुख्यग्रह्मियमं कानते कुरु कार्य सुशोभनम् ॥ 57 ॥

सुखं तव ममापि स्यादिषहि विहिते किल ।

O Sweet speaking One! If this be true; then surely he is your enemy; he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave your this stubbornness and marry me; both of us shall then be happy. Visnu shines well with Kamalā, Brahmā looks splendid with Savitri, Rudra is well associated with Pārvatī and Indra with Saṃi, so I will shine well with you; there is no doubt in this.

विष्यानुक्स्या सहाप्राणित सावित्रा च सहासम्भः ॥ 58 ॥

रुद्रो धाति च पार्वील्या गश्या शतमखतस्तथा ।

का नारी पतितीना च सुखं प्रानोति शाश्रन् ॥ 59 ॥

येन त्वमसियमपार्थिति न करोषि परिते शुभम् ।

कामः क्वाता गतः कान्ते यस्वां बाणी: सुकोमपेः। 60 ।

मादनै: पञ्धिः: कामं न ताउविते मंदपृधि: ।

No woman can ever be happy without any good husband. And why are you not then, acknowledging me your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where is now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with his maddening delicate five arrows?

मन्येउहमिव कामोपि दरावांस्वपि सुन्दरि ॥ 6 1 ॥

अबलेतीच म मवानाने न प्रेयाति मारणान्न ।

मनोभवस्य वैरं वा किमण्यस्ति मया सह ॥ 6 2 ॥

तेन च व्यव्यातालिंक न पुब्जति शिलीमुखान् ।

अथवा मेरुहितैर्वैवरिति उसौ कृपयज्ञः ॥ 6 3 ॥

सुखविद्यर्वसिभरनेत न्वयि न प्रहत्यपि ।

O Fair one! I think that Madana (the god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; else why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the Devas have advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you.

त्वक्ता में मृगशाराविष्ठ पढ़ातापार कीधस्यि ॥ 64 ॥

मंदोदरीव तन्त्यिं परित्यज्य रुर्णं नृपम् ।

अनुकूलं परितं पढ़ात्या चकारा शर्डे पतिम् ।

कामातं च यदा जाता मोहेन व्याकुलान्तरा ॥ 65 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो पड़ामकन्क्रे

देवीचिते घोडशोप्रथाय: 11 16 11

O One of slender body! As Mandodari had to marry afterwards, when she became passionate, a hypocrite, and so she had to repent thinking that she had not married before a beautiful auspicious king, so I think, O One, having eyes like the young of a deer! You, too, will have to repent like her if you decline to marry me now.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth

Book in the conversation between the Devi

and Mahiṣasura in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahāpurānam, of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XVII

On Mandorari's Accounts

यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य देवी पण्ड्छ दानवम् ।

का सा मन्दोदी नारी कॉसौ सत्चो नृसत्चा ॥ १ ॥

गरः को वा गुपः पशुताने वृहि कक्षानकम् ।

वित्तरोग यथा प्राणत दुःखं विनताय पुनः ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, the Devi asked the Dānava “Who is that Mandodari? Who is that king who was not first taken by her? And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how did she repent afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.

महिष उवाच

सिंहले नाम ईशोर्स्त विद्यातः पृथिवतले ।

घनपादवर्षयुक्तो धनधान्यस्पूद्धिनान् ॥ 3 ॥

Thus asked by the Devi, Mahisa began to say: "O Devi! There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated with various trees and prosperous with wealth and grain.

चन्द्रसेनाप्रधस्त जाग धर्मपरावणः ।

न्यायवण्डधर: शानतः प्रजायणतन्ततः ॥ 4 ॥

सत्यवादी मुदुः शूरस्तितक्ष्नान्तिसागाः ।

गगस्त्रवित्वसंधर्मौ छनुवेदेस्तिनिष्ठितः ॥ 5 ॥

A virtuous king, named Candrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, peaceful, truthful, heroic charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed in politics, ethics and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in Sāstras, knowing all forms of religions and much skilled in archery. He was mindful in governing his subjects and he used to punish according to the laws of Justice.

तस्य भार्यां वरातोहा सुन्दरी सुभगा गृधा ।

सदाचारात्रसिपुयुची पतिभक्तिपरायणा ॥ 6 ॥

The king had a beautiful well-qualified wife, very handsome and broad-hipped. She was very much devoted to his husband and always engaged in religious acts and of good conduct.

नाना गुणवती कान्ता सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ।

सुप्रुवे प्रथमे गर्भे पूर्वी सा चातिसुन्दरीम् ॥ 7 ॥

This wife, endowed with all auspicious signs, gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first delivery.

पिता चातीव सन्तुषः पुर्जी प्राय्य मनोरामम् ।

मन्दोर्धर्तिन मानास्या: पिता चक्रे मुद्रावितः ॥ 8 ॥

The King Candrasena, the father, was very pleased to have this beautiful daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodari.

इन्टोः कलैल चात्यर्थ बढ़ये सा दिति दिति ।

द्रशवर्षं यदा जाता कन्या चातिमनोहरा ॥ 9 ॥

This daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she grew ten years old, she became very handsome.

वारर्थं नृपतिभ्रन्तमावग च दिति दिति ।

मढ्रेलाप्राधि: शूर: सुधनाना पापाधिव: ॥ 10 ॥

तस्य पुत्रोतिभेधारी कंकुर्णीशोतिविषयुतः ।

बाहणी: कवितो गोरे संकुतोज्ञाय रा: शुभः ॥ 11 ॥

सर्वलक्षापमप्र: सर्वविद्धायधारण: ।

राज दृष्टा तदा राजी नाना गुणकती विद्या ॥ 12 ॥

The King now became anxious to have suitable bridegroom and used to think of it everyday. The Brāhmins then told the king that there was a prince named Kambugriva, the intelligent son of the powerful king Sudhanvā of Madra; this prince was endowed with all kingly qualifications and versed in all knowledge and was therefore a fit match for your daughter.

कंडुगीयार कन्यां खरा व्याजीय वरविणीम् ।

सा तु पत्युर्वचः शुचा पूर्णी पण्ड्छ सादरम् ॥ 13 ॥

विवाहं ते पिता कर्तुं कंडुगीयेण वाज्छति ।

The king then asked his dear qualified wife that he would like to marry his daughter to Kambugriva. The queen, hearing this, asked her daughter Mandodari that her father was desiring to marry her to Kambugriva, the son of the king of Madra.

Book V Chapter XVII

तच्छुला मातारं प्राह वाक्यं मन्तोदरी तदा ॥ 14 ॥

नाहं पाँति कर्णिषामि नेच्छा मेउति परिश्रेह ।

कोभारं ज्ञनास्थाय कालं नेच्यामि सर्वथा ॥ 15 ॥

Hearing her mother's words, Mandodari spoke thus: "O Mother! I have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any husband; I will take the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus pass the rest of my life."

स्वातन्येण चरिध्यामि तपस्तीत्र सदैव हि ।

पारतन्ये परं: दुःखे मात: संसारसाररे ॥ 16 ॥

स्वातन्यानोक्षामिन्याहु: पशिडताः शाखकोंविद्धाः ।

तस्मामुक्ता भविष्यामि पतया मे न प्रयोजनम् ॥ 17 ॥

O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in this ocean of world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead incessantly a life of severe asceticism. The Pandits versed in the Śāstras say that taking up the vow of separateness and independence leads to salvation; I will thus be liberated; I have no need for a husband.

विवाहे वर्तमाने तु पाककस्य च सविर्धो ।

वक्त्यं वचनं सम्यक्त्वदीपान्त्रिस मर्वदा ॥ 18 ॥

श्रूद्रदेवरवाणीं दारीस्तं श्रूग्रात ।

पतिचितान्तप्रवर्तिलं दुःखादुःखातरं सुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

क्वाचित्वतिन्यां का कामिनीं च भवेचादि ।

At the time of marriage ceremony, one has to say before the consecrated Fire that one will remain always a dependent to one's husband in every way; besides in a father-in-law's house, one has to pass one's time as a slave, as it were, to one's mother-in-law and to husband's (younger) brothers; again one will have to think oneself as happy when one's husband is happy and as unhappy when one's husband is unhappy; this is the worst of all miseries.

तदा महतरं दुःखं सरपनीसम्पयं भवेत् ॥ 20 ॥

तदेधां जावते पत्पी क्लेशशापि भवेदय ।

Again if the husband marries again another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one's own husband and therefore suffering is endless.

संसारे क्व सुखं मातर्नीर्णी च विशेषतः ॥ २। ॥

स्वभावात्परन्त्राणां संसारे स्वध्नर्धिणि ।

Therefore what happiness can there be in this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made dependent by Nature?

शुतं मया पुरा मातरुक्तानंरणाग्यज: ॥ २२ ॥

उत्तमः सर्वभर्मों धुवाद्वरजो नृपः ।

O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the religious son of Uttānapāda, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and yet he became King.

पत्नी धर्मपंरा साखी पति भक्तिपरायणम् ॥ 23 ॥

अपराधं विज्ञा कान्तां तचक्ताजिचिते प्रियाणम् ।

And the King Uttānapāda banished his dear wife, solely devoted to her husband, without any cause, to the forest.

एर्वेश्वरायन दुःखानि विद्यामने तु भर्ति ॥ 24 ॥

कालयोगामुते तमिश्रायी स्यादुःखणाजनम् ।

वैधघ्यं परमं दुःखं शोकसंतपाकारकम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore women have to suffer such diverse pains while their husbands are living; and if by chance the husband dies, then women get interminable pains; the widowhood becomes the only source of grief and sorrow.

परोषितपतिलेअर पिं: दुःखं स्यादधिकं गृहे ।

मदानास्थिविद्यायाः किं सुखं पतिसंगजम् ॥ 26 ॥

तस्मात्यतिनं कर्तेल्यः सर्वेक्षेति मतिभिंम ।

Again if the husband be in foreign lands, women become subjected to the fire of Cupid, and then the house becomes an object of more agony. Thus whether the husband lives or dies, there is no happiness at any time. Thus, according to my opinion, I ought never to accept any husband.

एवं प्रोक्ता त्वा माता पर्यत ग्रह युगनामजा ॥ 27 ॥

न च खांक्षित भार्तरं कौभागरज्ञाधारिणी ।

The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter had said. Mandodari would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she had no desire to marry.

त्रतजाध्ययरा निर्वलं संसाराधिमुखी सदा ॥ 28 ॥

न क्रांक्षिति पति कर्तु बहुदोषविचविष्ण ।

Srimaddevibhagavatam

She had brought forward many faults in worldly life and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her time alone. She did not yearn after a husband.

भार्यामा आमितं श्रुत्वा तथेव संस्थितो नृप: ॥ 29 ॥

विकाहो न कृतः पुथ्या ज्ञाला भावविजितात्म। ।

The King, hearing thus, came to know, that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to pass his time without giving away his daughter in marriage.

वर्तमाना गृहेचेव पिता माता न रहिता ॥ 30 ॥

यीवनस्यांकुरा जाता नारीणां कामदीपकाः ।

Thus the daughter lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that time signs of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter.

तथापि सा वयस्यापि: प्रेरितापि पुनः पुनः ॥ 31 ॥

घकमे न पति कर्तुं ज्ञानार्थिवद्यापिणी ।

Her comrades requested her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she spoke many words of wisdom and did not show any inclination for marriage.

एकदोधान्देशं स वित्तुं बहुपादपे ॥ 32 ॥

जगाम सुमुखी प्रेणा सैरंधीगपासेविता ।

Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out with her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified with various trees.

रेम कुशोदरी ततायपल्कुसुमिता लता: ॥ 33 ॥

पुथागि चित्ती रया वयस्थापि: समातृता ।

There the slender bodied one began to play enjoy with her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful flowering creepers.

कोशलापिपतिलत मार्गे दैवलगात्ता ॥ 34 ॥

आजगाम महीबीरी वीरतेनो5तिविश्रुतः ।

एकाकी रथमारूकः: कतिचित्सेवकैकुंतः ॥ 35 ॥

सैन्यं च पुह्नतस्य समायाति शनैः शनैः ।

Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the powerful Virasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his chariot, attended by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were coming slowly behind him at some distance.

दृषस्तस्य बवस्याधिरूततः पार्थिवस्ताद ॥ 36 ॥

मन्दोदर्यै तथा प्रोक्ते समाप्ताति नर: पथि ।

रथाड़ो महावाहू. रूपवात्मदनोउपर: ॥ 37 ॥

Her comrades, then, looking at that King from a distance, told Mandodari “O friend! See! Some body, strong and beautiful, like a second God of Love is coming towards us, mounted on a chariot.

मन्येड़ नृपाति: क्रांक्षाप्राणे भाग्यवशाद्धि ।

एवं बुवल्यां ततासौ कोशलेन्द्र: समाताः।। 38 ॥

I think some King he will be and we are very lucky that he has come here. While thus talking the King arrived there.

दृष्टवा तासिस्तार्थर्गी विस्मयं प्राप भूपति: ।

उत्तीर्थ स स्थातूर्णं पप्रच्छ परिचारिकाम् ॥ 39 ॥

केनं बाला विशागताकी कसव पुत्री बलूगु मे ।

एवं भृषा तु सैरस्थी तमुवाच सुश्विस्मता ॥ 40 ॥

प्रथमं बूहि मे वीर पृच्छामि त्वां सुतोचन ।

कोसि सर्व किमिदायात: किं कार्य वद सोजन ॥ 41 ॥

The King, looking on that blue coloured woman with beautiful eyes became surprised and getting down from the chariot, asked the maidservant, "O Gentle one! Who is this woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this without any delay." The attendant smiling, told him thus: O Beautiful-eyed One! Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come here? What do you want to do here?

इति पृष्टस्तु सैरंध्या तापुवाच महीपति: ।

कोशाले नाम देशोर्जिति पुथिखां परमाङ्ग: ॥ 42 ॥

तस्य पालयिता चाहं वीरसेनाधिधः प्रिये ।

The female attendant thus asking him, the King replied: There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Virasena.

वाहिती पृष्ठतः कामं समयाति चतुर्विधा ॥ 43 ॥

मारीभ्रमादिषु प्राप्त विद्धि मां कोशलाधिपम् ।

My fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way and have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala.

Book V Chapter XVII

सैरक्ष्यवाच

चन्द्रसेन्मुता राजसाना मन्दोररी किल ।। 44 ।।

उद्याने न्तुकामेयं प्राप्ता कमललोचना ।

The female attendant said: "O King! This lotus-eyed one is the daughter of the King Candrasena; her name is Mandodari.

शुवा तद्वापितं राजा प्रत्युवाय प्रसाधिकाम ।। 45 ।

सैरपि चतुरासि त्वं राजपूर्णि प्रबोधय ।

She has come here in this garden for sporting. Hearing thus the attendant's words, the King replied: "O Sairandhri! You appear to be smart; therefore make the King's daughter understand my following words clearly!"

ककृत्यवंशजशहं राजास्त्रि चाक्लोचने ॥ 46 ॥

गाधवेंण विवाहेन परिमां मंकु कामिनि ।

“O Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended from the Kakutsha line; O fair woman! Marry me according to the rules of Gandharva marriage.*

Note: Gandharva marriage-one of the eight forms of marriage; this form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting relatives

न मे भार्योसित सुशोणि वयसोढुतरीवान ॥ 47 ॥

वांधारि रूपसंपेखां सुकुलां कामिनी किल ।

O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful woman, of a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like to marry you?

अथवा ने चिता महुं विधिना दातुमहिति ॥ 48 ॥

अनुकूलपतिशई भविष्यापि न संभावः ।

Or your father may marry you to me according to rules and ceremonies; if so, I will no doubt be your husband as you desire."

महिष उवाच

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्य सैरंधी प्राह तां तदा ॥ 49 ॥

प्रहस्य मधुरं वाक्यं कामशास्त्रविशार्ता ।

Mahisa said: “O Devi! The female attendant, expert in the science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter smilingly and in sweet words.”

मन्दोदरि नृप: प्राप्त: सूर्यवंशसमुद्धव: ॥ 50 ॥

रूपवान्तवाक्नो तवेया तत्सम: पुनः ।

प्रीतिमाघुपतिजान्तसत्त्वयि सुन्दारि सर्वथा ॥ 51 ॥

O Mandodari! A very good-looking beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty, powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted to you and loves you very much."

विताउपि ने शिजगलाईि परित्यति सर्वथा ।

विवाहकाले ने ज्ञाला तां च वैशरायसंयुताम् ॥ 52 ॥

O Large-eyed One! Your time of marriage has come and yet you have not married; rather you are against it. Your father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful.

इत्याहासमान्य नृपतिर्विंतः श्रय पुनः पुनः ।

पूर्वी प्रबोधयंत्रेता सैरंध्यः सेवेन रता:॥ 53 ॥

वक्तुं शक्ता बयं न त्वा हुद्धभर्ता पुनः ।

See! How many a time your father sighed and told us “O attendants! Always serve my daughter and awaken her to this. But you are engaged in penances and austerities, in Haṭha Dharma; therefore we cannot request you on this matter.” भर्तुं: शुष्पणं क्लिंणं परो धर्मपंड्वीमानुः ॥ 54 ॥

भर्तों सेवमाना वे नारी स्वर्गमावान्यात् ।

तस्मालुक विशालाथि विवाहं विधिपुर्कम् ॥ 55 ॥

The Munis have said: To serve the husband is the highest virtue of a woman." O Large-eyed! Women get Heaven if they serve their husband; therefore you better marry according to rules and ceremonies.

मन्दोर्वुवाच

नाहं पर्ि कंकिथामि चरिष्ये तप अबुतम् ।

निवार्य नृपं बाले किं मां पश्यति निक्षः ॥ 56 ॥

Mandoārī said: “I am not going to marry; better that I should perform an extraordinary tapasyā (asceticism); O Girls! You go and ask the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at me.”

सैरध्याव

दुर्जयो देवि कामोउरी कालोउरी दुरितकमः ।

तत्साम्ने वचनं पध्यं कतुर्महसि सु-वृद्धि ॥ 57 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

अन्यथा व्यसनं नृनमापतेहिति निश्रयः ।

The female attendant then said, “O Devi! Passion is very hard to conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my advise as the medical and keep my request. “And if you do not keep it, surely danger will befall you.”

इति तस्य वच: शुवा कन्योवाचावर्ती सद्यो् । ५ १ १ ॥

यद्धद्वेनेपृद्वत् दैवयोगादसंगयम् ।

न विद्याई कारियेउर्द सर्वथा परिचारिके ॥ ५ ९ ॥

Hearing this, Mandodari replied “O attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will inevitably come to pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at all.”

महिष्य उवाच

इति तस्यातु निर्विधं जात्या प्राह नृपं पुन: ।

गच्छ राजन्यथाकामं नैयमिच्छति सस्तपतम् ॥ 60 ॥

Mahisa said: “The female attendant, knowing this her obstinate view, told the King: “O King! This woman likes not a good husband; you would better go wherever you like.

नृपस्तु तद्धचः श्रुत्वा निरितः सह सेनया ।

कोशलाधिम्ना धृत्वा कामिनीं प्रति निःसूचः ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो पक्षमकर्ये

सतदशो3थायः ॥ 17 ॥

"The King heard and did not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on Mandodari's accounts in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XVIII

On the Killing of Mahiṣa

महिष उवाच:

तस्यासु भगिनो कन्या नान्या चैदुमती गृष्या ।

विवाह्योग्या संजाता सुरूपावराजा तदा ॥ १ ॥

Mahiṣa said: “O Devi! Mandodari had a sister Indumati;” unmarried and endowed with all auspicious signs. She grew up in time to a marriageable age.

तस्या विवाह: संपुन्तः संजातघः ख्वयवतः ।

राजानो बहुदेशीयाः संगतास्तत्र मण्डघे ॥ 2 ॥

The Svayamvara assembly (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of visitors assembled together) was then called for the marriage of the maiden Indumati.

तया वृत्तो नृपः काध्रक्षतवापूरंपुतः ।

कृलशीलसमायुक्तः सर्वतक्षणारंभुतः ॥ ३ ॥

The Kings from various parts came there and the maiden Indumati selected from among them a beautiful strong king, of noble lineage and endowed with all auspicious signs.

तदा कामातुरा जाता विद्ट वीक्ष्य नूर्यं तु सा ।

चक्रमे देवयोगातु शठं चातुर्यभूषितम् ॥ 4 ॥

At that time, by the undescribable power of Destiny, Mandodari seeing the deceitful cunning and hypocrite King of Madra, became passionate and desired to marry him.

पितरं प्रात् तत्वंी विवाहं कुरं मे पितः ।

इच्छा मे उध सपुढ़ता दृष्टवा मढ़ाधिंदं स्थित ॥ ५ ॥

That slender woman Mandodari then addressed her father thus: "O Father! Seeing the King of Madra in this assembly, I am desirous to marry him; so perform also my marriage ceremony now.

चन्द्रसेनोरिप तत्स्थूला पुचासत्स्वाधितं रहः ।

प्रसनेच च मनसा तत्कार्यें तत्परोभन्त ।। ६ ॥

When the king heard this request from her own daughter privately, he became very glad and began with promptness, to make preparations for the marriage.

तमाहूय नृप गेहे विवाहविधिता ददो ।

कन्या मन्दोदरीं तम्पी पारिखहं तथा बहु ॥ ७ ॥

चाहदेशोणीय तां प्राय्य सुत्वरीं मुदितोउभवत् ।

जगाम स्वगृहे तुढो राज्ञापि सहितः तिज्वा ॥ 8 ॥

Book V Chapter XVIII

He invited the King of Madra to his own palace and gave him in marriage his own daughter Mandodari, according to due rites and ceremonies with an abundance of dowry and wealth. The King of Madra Cārudesṇa became very glad to marry the beautiful Mandodari and went back with her to his own abode.

रेमे नृपतिशादूत: कामिन्या बहुवासरन् ।

क्रतिधिस्त्रासपत्या स समागो रहः किल १ १ १

सैरंध्या कथितं तस्यै तना दृष्टः पतिस्तथा ।

उपालभ्यं ददौ तस्यै सिमतपूर्वे कश्चित्वा ॥ १० ॥

The King Caurdesṇa then enjoyed with her for good many days; when one day a maid-servant found the king in sexual intercourse with another maid servant in a lonely place and divulged this to Mandodari; she finding the king in that state became angry and rebuked him with a slight smiling countenance.

क्रवाचिवरी सामान्यां रहो रूपवर्तीं नृप: ।

क्रीडयेल्लालयन्धू: खेदे प्राप तदैव सा ॥ ११ ॥

न ज्ञातोर्ग शक्तः पूर्वे यदा दृष्टः स्वयंवरे ।

क्रिं कृतं तु यमा मोहाद्धिंविताड़ नृपेश है ॥ १ २ ॥

Again, on another occasion, Mandodari saw the king willingly engaged in amusements and sports with an ordinary beautiful woman and became very sorry and thought thus: When I saw him in the Swayanivara, I could not recognise him as a cheat; I am deceived by this King; Oh! What a wrong act have I done through delusion. This King is a rogue and he is totally shameless and has no dislike for contemptible things; it is now too late to repent for him.

किं कौरायदा सन्ताय निर्तेजे निर्घुणी गरे ।

का प्रतितिरुगे पर्वी विभाछ मम जीवितम् ॥ 13 ॥

How can I have any affection for this husband; fie on my living now! I forsake from this very day all the pleasures with my husband and all other worldly pleasures, and I take recourse now to contentment alone.

अष्ट प्रभूति संसारे सुखं त्यक्तं मया खलु ।

पतिसम्भोगर्ज सर्व सन्तोभोउदा मया कृतः ॥ 14 ॥

अकर्तैल्यं कृतं कार्य तज्जातं दुःखंद मम ।

देहत्याग: क्रिमये चेब्दूत्याजीते दुःल्यथा ॥ 15 ॥

I have committed a very wrong act that I ought never to have done; therefore it causes intense pain to me now. If I now commit suicide, then that sin will never forsake me, and I must have to enjoy the consequences thereof.

पितृगैहे ब्रजायणु त्रतपि न सुखं भवेत् ।

हास्ययोगा सखीनीं तु भवेयो नात्र संगश्ये ॥ १ ६ ॥

तस्मादत्रैव संवासो वैराययतुना मया ।

कतैल्यः कालायोगेन त्यस्वका कामसुखं पुतः ॥ १ ७ ॥

And if I return to my father's house, I will not be happy there, for my companions seeing me thus will, no doubt, ridicule me. Therefore, it is now advisable for me to avoid all the sensuous pleasures, become dispassionate and remain here patiently and abide by the strange combinations of Time."

महिष उवाच

इति सख्रित्य सा नारी दुःखाशोकपरायणा ।

स्थिता पतिर्गूं त्यक्वा सुखं संसारांत नतः ॥ 18 ॥

Mahisa said: “Thus that woman lamented and remorsed and began to remain there, very much sorrowful and distressed, renouncing thoroughly all the pleasures of the world.

तस्माल्यपि कल्याणी मामनाप्रत्य पूर्तिम्।

अन्यं कापु- कामात्तों संबिश्यासि ॥ 19 ॥

O Auspiciou ne! I am the king, yet your are showing your dislike for me; know, eventually, you, too, will be passionate and entertain afterwards an illiterate coward.

चर्चनं कुक मे तर्ध्य नारीणां परमं हित्म।।

अकुला परमं शोकं लप्ससे नात्र संशयः ॥ 20 ॥

Keep my word even now, it will be of great benefit and it will serve as a medicinal diet to you as to all women. In case you do not follow my advice, you will have to meet with extreme pain and misery, certainly.

देव्युवाच

मन्दात्मानच्छ पालाते युद्ध वा कुर समीघन्तम् ।

हत्वा लामसुगत्सर्वानामिष्यामि यथासुखम् ॥ 21 ॥

Šimaddevībhāgavatam

यदा यदा हि साधूनां इःखं भवति दानव ।

तदा तेभां च रक्षार्थे दैहं संभारायामदूम् ॥ 22 ॥

Hearing the words of Mahisāsura, the Devi said: "O you fool! Go to the lower worlds or stand up for fight, I will send you and the other Dānavas unto death and then go away at my pleasure. O Demon! I take up form to preserve righteous, whenever they suffer pain on this earth.

अस्पायाश्रु मे रूपयज्ञनाश्रु जन्य च ।

सुगणां रक्षणाथीय विद्धि देत्य विणिश्छान् ॥ 23 ॥

सर्वे ब्रवीय जानीति प्रार्थिताउं सूरैः किन।

त्वद्धार्थे ह्वरो लंहा स्वास्यामि निश्छला ॥ 24 ॥

तस्पायुध्यव वा गच्छ पातालमसुगतायम् ।

सर्वेधा त्वां हनिष्यामि सत्यमेनदुर्जीम्यह्न ॥ 25 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas! Formless, birthless I am; yet, at times, I take up form and be born to save the Devas. Know this firmly, O wicked Mahisa! The Devas prayed to Me for your destruction. Therefore I will not rest until I kill you. I speak all these truly to you. Therefore fight or go to Pātāla, the abode of the Asura; I speak truly to you again that I will destroy you wholly.

व्यास उचाच

इत्युक्तः स तया देया धनुगदाय दानवः ।

युद्धकाम: स्थितस्तत संग्रामायणभूमियु ॥ 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing thus the Devi's words, the Dānava took up his bow and came to the battle, fully stretching the string of his bow up to his ears, and began to shoot sharpened arrows with great force. \( ^{17} \)  Devi.

युभोच तसरा बाणाकर्णक्रृष्टीक्रळशिलान् ।

देवी चिष्ट्रेत तावणीः कोधानुक्तरणिषुः ॥ 27 ॥

The Devi, too, hurled with anger, arrows tipped with iron and cut off the Asura's arrows to pieces.

तयोः परस्यं सुखं सम्बभूव भगप्रदम् ।

देवानां दानवानां च परस्यतज्वैविणाम् ॥ 28 ॥

The fight between them rose to such a terrible pitch that it caused terror to both the Devas and the Dānavas, trying hard to be victorious over each other.

मध्ये दुर्धर आगवय मुभोच च शिलीभुखान् ।

देवीं प्रति विषासकान्कोयज्ञतिदकाण्न ॥ 29 ॥

In the midst of the terrible encounter, the demon Durdhara came up to fight and made the Devi angry and shot arrows, all terribly poisonous and sharpened on stones, at Her.

ततो भगवती कृष्टा ते जयान शितः: शरैः ।

दूर्यस्त्य यपातोत्यां गतात्युगिरीरभुगवत् ॥ 30 ॥

The Bhagavatī, then, got very angry and hit him hard with sharp arrows. Durdhara, struck thus, fell down dead on the battle field like a mountain top. तं तथा निर्तरं दृष्ट्वा विज्ञेः परमास्थिति ।

आगाय सत्थिभाथीणीज्ञान परमेश्वीम् ॥ 31 ॥

The demon Trinetra, well skilled in the uses of arrows and weapons, seeing him killed, came up to fight and shot at the Great Goddess with seven arrows.

अनगानांतृ चिद्धेद देवी तान्थिशड़ः शगन् ।

शिशूलेन त्रिनेत्रे तु जयान जगद्धिक्वा ॥ 32 ॥

Before these arrows came on Her, She cut them to pieces with Her sharp arrows and by Her trident killed Trinetra.

अधकस्त्वाजगामागृ हनं दृष्टा शिलोचन् ।

गद्या लोहमथागृ सिंहं विद्याय मतकें ॥ 33 ॥

Trinetra thus killed, Andhaka quickly came in the battle-field and struck violently on the head of the lion with his iron club.

सिंहस्तु नखापातेन तं हत्वा बलवस्तम् ।

चखाद तत्सा मांसमंधकस्य क्वापित्वः ॥ 34 ॥

The lion killed that powerful Andhaka by striking the demon with his nails, out of anger, began to eat his flesh.

ताजणे निद्रातन्बीक्ष्य दानवो विस्मयं गतः ।

चिक्षेप तत्सा बाणानतितीक्षणाक्छिलाशन् ॥ 35 ॥

Mahisāsura became greatly astonished at the death of these Ausras and began to shoot pointed arrows, sharpened on stone, at Her.

दिक्षा चके शरणदेवी तानप्राणातिड्कीपुर्जेः ।

गद्या तात्यायामत दैत्यं बक्षसि चाधिक्वा ॥ 36 ॥

The Devi Ambikā cut his arrows into two

Book V Chapter XVII

before they came on Her and struck the Demon on his breast by Her club.

स गड़ाधिश्तो मुछीभवापामवाधकः ।

विश्रह्य पीड़ा पाणात्या पुनगताय सत्वरः ॥ 37 ॥

ज्यान गदया सिंहं मूर्टिंगं क्रोधस्मवित्रः ।

That vile Mahisāsura, the tormentor of the Devas, fell in a swoon under the stoke of the club but patiently bore it and, at the next moment, came again and struck the lion on his head by his club.

सिंहोरप्रि नख्यातने तं ददार महापुरम् ॥ 38 ॥

विद्यार यौरकं रूपं सोउप कसिंहो बघूव ह ।

नर्यैर्विद्यारयामास देवीर्भही मदोककटम् ॥ 39 ॥

The lion, too, by his nails rent that great Asura to pieces. Mahisāsura, then, quitting the man-form took up the lion-form and by his claws cut the Devi's lion and wounded him very much by his nails.

तं च केसिर्णं वीक्ष्य देवी कूढ़ा ह्योपुर्षेः ।

शरीरवाकिरन्तीक्षी: कृरोराशीविविर्ति ॥ 40 ॥

On Mahisāsura taking up this lion-form, the Devi became very angry and began to shoot arrows after arrows at him all very terrible, sharp and like poisonous snakes.

त्यक्ता स हरित्यं तु गजो भूत्वा मदयवः ।

शैलशुष़ं के कृत्वा चिक्षेप चपिड़ां प्रति ॥ 41 ॥

Then the Asura quitting the lion form assumed the appearance of a male elephant, oozing out juice from his temples and began to hurl the mountain tops by his trunk.

आगच्छनं निंरे: शूर्द्धे देयी बाणीः शिलाशिंतः ।

चकार तिलशः खण्डाडुहास जगद्धिक्वा ॥ 42 ॥

Seeing the mountain peaks thus hurled on Her, She cut them off to pieces by Her sharp arrows and began to laugh.

उत्पच च तत सिंहस्तस्य मूर्दिन व्यवसिताः ।

नद्यैविंदारयामास महिषं गजरूपिणम् ॥ 43 ॥

The Devi's lion on the other hand, sprang on the head of the elephant Mahisa and by his claws rent him to pieces.

विद्यार याजरूयं च बभूवाहिषदी तथा ।

हनुकामो हरिं कोपाएछाणो बलवततः ॥ 44 ॥

To kill the Devi's lion, then, Mahisa quitted his elephant-form and assumed the appearance of a Sarabha, more powerful and terrible than lion.

तं वीक्ष्य शगर्य देथी खड्योन सरषाचित्ता ।

उत्तमोने जघानागु सोअपि तो प्राहतत्तद ॥ 4 5 ॥

The Devi seeing that Šarabha became angry and struck on the head of that Šarabha with Her axe; the Sarabha, too, attacked the Devi.

तयोः परयरं युद्धे बध्वातिपचप्रदम् ।

माहिषं रूपमास्थाय शृंगाफ्यां प्रहतन्ते ॥ 46 ॥

Their fight became horrible; Mahisāsura, then, assumed the appearance of a buffalo and struck the Bhagavatī by his horns.

पृष्ठप्रधमणेनागु शृज्ञावितैम्हासुरः ।

ताड्याभास नत्वड़ी घोरकरो भयानकः ॥ 47 ॥

That horrible Asura, of hideous appearance, swinging his tail, began to attack the thin bodied Devi.

पृष्ठन पर्वतान्यूढ़े गृहीत्वा भामयन्वलत् ।

प्रेयाभास पाणातम प्रहसन्यरा मुदा ॥ 48 ॥

तामुवार चलोन्मत्सिह्छ देखि रणाणगे ।

That violent Asura caught hold of the mountain peaks by his tail and, whirling them round and round, hurled them on the Devi. That vicious soul, then, maddened with his strength, laughed incessantly and addressed thus: "O Devi! Be steady in the battle-field.

अशहां त्वा हनिष्यामि रूपयीवनभूषिताम् ॥ 49 ॥

मूखांत्रिस मदमातअष्य म्यम्न सह सूमून ।

क्रोषि मोहितास्तीव पूषा बलवती खरा ॥ 50 ॥

I will send you today unto death, and your youth and beauty too. You are an illiterate fellow as you have become maddened to fight with me. Really you are deluded in your pretensions that you are very strong; this idea of yours is absolutely false.

हृता लयं निहिन्यामि देवान्यपर्यष्ठान् ।

दे नारी प्रेत: कृत्वा जेतुष्टिनि मां शका: ॥ 51 ॥

I will kill you first and the hypocrite Devas after

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

who want to vanquish me by putting up a woman in their front.

देव्युवाच

मा गर्यं कृम मन्त्रमस्तित्त तिह रणोगणे ।

करिष्यामि निरतांकान्हता लां सुसतमान् ॥ 52 ॥

The Devi said: “O Villain! Do not boast; keep yourself firm in the fight. Today I will kill you and make the Devas discard their fear.”

पीवासुडा मार्वीमिं महां शगतामि रोउंधभ ।

देवानां दुःखदं यपं मुनीनां भयकारकम् ॥ 53 ॥

O Wretch! You are a Sinner; you torment the Devas and terrify the Munis. Let me have my drink of sweet decoction of grapes. And then I will slay you undoubtedly."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा चषकं हिंग गृहीत्वा सुर्या युन्तम् ।

पपौ पुनः पुनः क्रोधान्तुकामा महासुरम् ॥ 54 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Saying thus, the Devi, wrathful and eager to kill Mahisāsura, iook up the golden cup filled with wine and drank again and again.

पौत्वा श्राक्षासर्व मिहं शूलमादाय सत्वा ।

दुत्राव दानवं देवी हर्षयन्देवतागणन् ॥ 55 ॥

When the Devi finished Her drink of the sweet grape juice, She pursued him with trident in Her hands, to the great joy of all the Devas.

देवास्तां तखुवुः ग्रामा चढ़ः कुर्मुवर्षणम् ।

जय जीविते ते प्रौचुईनुभीनी च नि:स्वनैः ॥ 56 ॥

The Devas began to rain showers of flowers on the Devi and praised Her and shouted victories to Her with Dundubhi (a Divine drum) Jai, Jiva; victory, live.

སྟོབས: सिद्धान्यश्वर्ग: पिशाणोपारणारणा: ।

क्रिस्तारः प्रेक्ष्य संग्रामं सुदिता गगने स्थितः ॥ 57 ॥

The Rşis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Piśācas, Uragas, and Kinnaras witnessed the battle from the celestial space and became very much delighted.

सोप्रि नानाविध्योद्वानुका कृपा पुनः पुनः ।

मायामयाङ्गधानाजौ देवीं कपटयपिडतः ॥ 58 ॥

On the other hand, Mahisāsura, the hyppocrite Pundit, began to assume various magic forms and struck the Devi repeatedly.

चिछकाउपि चे तं पायं विशूलेन बलादूघि ।

ताउवामास तीक्षणेन क्रोभाउमाणलोचना ॥ ५९ ॥

The Devi Caṇḍika, then, infuriated and with eyes reddened, pierced violently the breast of that vicious Mahisa with Her sharp trident.

ताडितोउसी पपातोवयं मृछ्धीय मुहुतकम् ।

पुनक्थाय चामुगडा पढ़्नां वेगतादाउवत् ॥ 60 ॥

The Demon, then, struck by this trident, fell senseless on the ground; but got up in the next moment and kicked the Devi forcibly.

विनिर्हल पदाचार्तैज्ञास च मुडुर्मुंः ।

राज वरा द्राणी शब्द देवानां भयंकारकम् ॥ 61 ॥

That Great Asura, thus kicking the Devi, laughed repeatedly and bellowed so loudly that the Devas were all terrified with that noise.

ततो देबी सहसरां सुनाभं चक्रभुतम् ।

को कृत्वा जगादाछ्वे: संस्थितं महिषासुम् ॥ 62 ॥

पश्य चक्रं मदांधाछ्त तव कण्डनिकृतनम् ।

क्षणामातं स्थितो भूत्वा यमलोकं जजापुंगा ॥ 63 ॥

Then the Devi held aloft the brilliant discus of good axle and of thousand spokes and loudly spoke to the Asura in front: O Stupid! Look! This Cakra will sever your throat today; wait a moment, I am sending you instantly unto death.

इत्युक्त्वा दाणां चकं मुमोच जगदायिका ।

शिरशिक्तां रथोगेन दानवस्य तदा गे। १ 64 ॥

Saying this, the Divine Mother hurled the Cakra. Instantly that weapon severed the Dānava's head from his body.

सुस्वाव कहिरं चोषणं कण्ठनलाद्रिरेथां ।

गैरिकाछाणं प्रौड़ प्रवाहामिव नैईरम् ॥ 65 ॥

The hot streams of blood gushed out from his neck as the violent streams of water get out from mountains, coloured red with red sandstones.

कबन्धस्तस्य दैत्यस्य ध्यान वै पतितः क्षितौ ।

जयशब्द्धु देवानां बधून सुखवर्धनः ॥ 66 ॥

सिंहस्तवितिकलस्तत पलायनप्रपत्ताव ।

दानवान्भक्ष्यायामास क्षुधानां इव सङूरे ॥ 67 ॥

Book V Chapter XIX

The headless body of that Asura moved, to and fro, for a moment and then dropped on the ground. The loud acclamations of “Victory” were sounded to the great joy of the Devas. The very powerful lion began to devour the soldiers that were flying away, as if he was very hungry.

युते च महिषे कुरे दानवा भयपीडिताः ।

यूतशेषाङ्ग ये केचित्यालां ते ययुपूँ ॥ 68 ॥

O King! The wicked Mahisāsura thus slain, the Demons that remained alive were terrified and fled away, very much frightened, to Pātāla.

आनन्दं परमं जगमुदैवालत्मिमघापातते ।

मुनयो मानवाश्रेव चे धान्ये साधव: श्रित्ते ॥ 69 ॥

The Devas, Rşis, human beings and the other

saints on this earth were all extremely glad at the death of this wicked Demon.

चिष्डकाउजि रणं चलकता शुभे देतेश्व संभिता ।

देवास्तताययु: शीर्घं सतोतुकामा: सुखप्रदाम् ॥ 70 ॥

इति श्रीमद्दीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रकास्कन्ने

महिषासुर्वधो नामाहादसो5धाव: 11 18 11

The Bhagavati Caṇḍikā quitted the battle-field and waited in a holy place. Then the Devas came there with a desire to praise and chant hymns to the Devi, the Bestower of their happiness.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of the Dānava Mahisāsura in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XIX

CHAPTER XIX

On the Hymns to the Devi

व्यास उवाच

अथ प्रमृदिताः सर्वे देवा इन्द्रपुरोगमाः ।

महिषं निर्तं दृष्ट्या तुधुवुर्जपद्धिकवम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Then Indra and all the Devas became very glad to see the great Mahisāśura slain; they all began to praise and chant hymns to the World-Mother.

देवा ऊचुः

बहा सुजत्यवति विद्यापुरिंद मंडेशः

गजसना तदेव हरते ननु चांताकता ।

ईशना न तेउपि च भवति तया विहीतास्त-

सात्चावेय जातः स्थितिनाशकर्सी ॥ २ ॥

The Devas said: It is by thy Power that Brahmā becomes able to create this world, Viṣṇu, to preserve, and Maheśvara to destroy during the Pralaya time (the Great Dissolution) of this universe. But when they are bereft of Thy Power, they are quite unable to do such.

कौतिंर्मितः स्मृतितगी कक्णा दया लं

श्रद्धा धृतिश्व सच्छा कमला जया च ।

शुटि: कलाउथ विज्ञाय गिरिजा जया लं

तुिटः प्रमा त्वमसि बुद्धिक्मा सया च ॥ 3 ॥

विद्या क्षमा जगति कान्तराषीह मेधा

सर्वे त्वमेव विदिता घुवनत्रयेस्तिन् ।

आधिवर्षिता रत तु गणिक्षिपरागु कर्तु

को वा क्षमः सकललोकनिवासमूमे ॥ 4 ॥

Therefore, O Devi! Thou art undoubtedly the Prime Cause in the preservation and destruction of this whole Universe. O Devi; Thou art, in this world, Fame, idea and ideal, memory; Thou art the goal, mercy, compassion, faith, constancy, earth; Thou art Kamalā, the Mantra Ajapā, respiration and perspiration, nourishment, Jayā, Vijayā (the destroyer of obstacles; a name of Durgā); Thou art contentment, correct notion, measure, intellect, Ramā (Lakṣmī), (wealth), knowledge, forgiveness, beauty, intelligence; Thou art the Śakti (power) of Rudra, Thou art Girijā and the Energy of God Umā and all other forces in this universe; this is known to everyone in the three worlds. Without any or all of these forces, no one is able to perform any action. Thou art the Supreme Cause of all this world. Therefore everything rests on Thee.

तं घोराण ननु न चेदोस कुम्नोगो

धर्तु क्षमी कक्षमितमायि ते भवेताम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पृथी न चेत्त्वमसि वा गानते कर्थ

स्थास्यन्तेत्यन्य निप्तिजलं वहुभारपुक्तम, || 5 ||

If Thou wert not the upholding Power, how could Kūrma (in the Tortoise Incarnation) and Ananta have upheld this world? O Mother! Wert Thou not this Earth, could all these world-load of things have rested on the sky?

ये वा सुवर्ति मनुजा अमरात्मयुजा

मायागुणैस्तव चतुर्मुखिविष्णुक्रान ।

शुभांशुविह्मयाव्युणोगमुख्यात्के

त्वामुते जनिने ते प्रभवत्ति कार्य || 6 ॥

O Mother! Those human beings that worship Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Moon, Fire, Yama, the God of Death, Vāyu, Gānésā, and the other Devas, they are certainly deluded by Thy Māyā. Could all those Devas do any action or any favour without Thy Energy?

ये जुहाति प्रविततेस्पधियो5म्य यजं

वासी सुगतामधिकृत्व हिंवः समुद्रम्।

स्वाहा न चेचास्मि ते कथमापुरद्धा

त्वामेव किं न हि यजंति ततो हि मुद्धा: ॥ 7 ॥

O Mother! Those that offer in any Sacrifice, a profuse quantity of ghee (clarified butter) as oblations to the several Devas, they are certainly conceived to be of very narrow views; Wert Thou not the Svāhā, could it have been possible for those Devas to get the offered oblations at that very instant? Certainly, therefore, they are fools and ignorant persons. There is no doubt in this.

भोगप्रदासि भवतीह चारावरणां

स्वांगैदैदासि खलु जीवनमेव नित्यम् ।

स्वीयानुसाङनि पोषयसीह

यघ्नतद्वसपानि च पालयसीति हेतोः ॥ 8 ॥

O Mother! Thou givest the several objects of nourishment and enjoyment to all the beings in this universe by Thy parts (the several transformations of these material things); it is Thou that nourishest the Devas, Thy devotees, as well as the others (the Dānavas, according to their Karma).

मातः स्वयं विरिचात्त्विचिने

विनोवाड़ीधान्यलाग्रहितांशं कटुंश वृषान् ।

नोच्छेदयन्ति पुरुषा निपुणाः कथंचिता-

सात्चाव्यतितांगं परीयासि देत्यान् ॥ 9 ॥

O Mother! As the owner of any garden plants, with pleasure the beautiful trees in his garden for his delight and, finding some of them not to bear any fruits or leaves or of a bitter taste, does not cut them off by their roots, so, O Devi! Thou hast brought into existence these Daityas out of their inferior Karmas and Thou art supported them.

यत्वं तु हिंस रणभूदिनं शरैरातिन्

देवागानासुतकेनिमानीचिद्विता ।

देहान्तरोय करणासमवाददाना

तते चरित्रिमद्मीस्तपूर्णाय ॥ 10 ॥

Knowing that the Daityas like to enjoy the celestial nymphs, Thou hast, out of compassion, killed them by their arrows in the battle-field, to afford them facilities in their rebirth in Heavens and thus to enjoy the Devas women which they could not have got in any other possible way. Therefore this Thy dealings with them are to fulfil their intentions and not to kill them.

चित्रं त्वपी यदसुभी रहिता न सन्ति

स्वच्छितितं दनुना: प्रधितप्रभावा: ।

येपां कृते जननि देहनिबन्यनं

ते क्रीडासरसल न चान्यतोज्ञ देतेुः ॥ 11 ॥

O Mother! It is a great wonder that to kill these Asuras Thou hadst to assume this Divine Body; Thou couldst have done so by Thy mere will. It seems that this act of Thine is but a mere Pastime. There is no other cause for this.

प्राप्ते कलावहू दुबटरे च काले

न त्वां भजन्ति मनुजा ननु बक्षितासे ।

धूर्सै: पुराणचतुरैहिंशिकूर्णां

सेवापराध विहितास्तव निर्मितानाम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Devi! Those human beings that do not worship Thee in this dreadful age of Kali, they are certainly deceived by the cunning Purāṇa makers who have deluded them to worship Hari

Book V Chapter XIX

49?

and Hara, who are Thy creations. Oh! What an amount of evil has befallen to those poor souls!

जात्या सुरांतल वशानसुरार्विदांगीछ

ये वै भजन्ति धृषि भावयुता निमगन्त् ।

धूला करे सुविमलं खलु दीपकं ते

कृपे पत्नित मनुज विजलैस्तितोये ॥ 13 ॥

O Devi! Those men know that the Devas, tormented by the Asuras, are Thy devotees, and yet they worship them; certainly such fellows, holding the lighted torches in their hands, plunge deep into the darkest waterless wells.

विद्या त्वमेव सुखदासुखदारप्रयविद्या

मालत्वमेव जननातिंहरा नराणाम् ।

भोहाश्रधिस्तु कलिता किल मन्द्रधीधि-

नारायिता जननि भोगपरैस्तधारघोः ॥ 14 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Vidyā (Blissful Intelligence) and Thou grantest pleasure and liberation; Thou art the Avidyā, (Great Delusion) and thus Thou causest bondage and pain in this world. O Mother! Thou only destroyest the affliction of the human beings; those that want liberation worship Thee, and those that are ignorant and attached to worldly enjoyments do not worship Thee.

ब्रहा हरश्र हरिय्यनिश शरणवं

पादाम्बुज तव भजन्ति सुरातधान्ये ।

रहै न येड्यपतयो मनसा भजन्ति

भान्ता: पतन्ति सततं भवमात्रे ने ॥ 15 ॥

What more can be said than this, that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and the other Devas incessantly worship Thy adorable lotus-feet; but those men that are of dull intellect and are mistaken, they do not meditate Thy feet and, therefore, they come again and again into this ocean of world.

चपिड त्वर्धप्रिलजोत्थरज:प्रसादैर्द्वा

कोर्ति सकलं भुवर्न भवादी ।

शीरिश याति खलु संहते हस्तु

त्वां सेवते न मनुजस्टित्व दुर्भागोउली ॥ 16 ॥

O Candika! It is through the grace of the dust of Thy lotus-feet that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and

Mahesvara are creating, preserving and destroying this universe. Therefore, O Goddess! Those men that do not serve Thee, are certainly very unfortunate.

वायदेवता त्वमसि देख सुरासुराणों

वर्तु न तेप्रसवरा: प्रभवित्न शक्ता: ।

त्वं चेभ्युवे वससि नैव चंद्व तेनां

यस्माद्वतिन मनुजा न हि तहिहीना: ॥ 17 ॥

O Mother of the Universe! Thou art the Goddess of speech of the Suras and the Asuras; thus if Thou didst not dwell in their mouths, they would not have been able to utter a single word; therefore, O Goddess! How can men speak when they are thus deprived of Thee!

ग्रणते हरित्यं भृगुणा कुपितेन कामं

मीनाे बभूव कमठः खलु सुकास्तु ।

पश्राब्रसि इति यश्छलकुबरायां

तान्सेवतां जननि मृत्युभयं न किं स्यात् ॥ 18 ॥

O Mother! It is due to the curse of Bhrgu Muni that Hari takes several incarnations as Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and deceitful Dwarf Incarnations; all these show clearly the dependence of Hari. How, then, can they avoid the fear of death when they serve these dependent incarnations!

शम्भो: परपात् भुवि सिलामिद्ध प्रसिद्ध

शापेन तेन च भृगतीक्षिति नातस्य ।

तं ये नरा भृवि भवन्ति कमालिंनं

तु तेमां सुखं कथमिह्वी परम मातः ॥ १९ ॥

O Mother! It is well known that the male generative organ of Śambhu, the Mahādeva fell unto the ground, owing to the curse of Bhrgu Muni, when he went to the hermitage of the Rsis. How can, then, happiness come in this world or in the next, to those who worship such a Śambhu who wears human skulls on His body!

योअभूव्राननगणाधियपनिर्देशणातं

ये भक्तिन मनुजा विलापप्रपना: ।

जानान्ति ते न सकलाधीक्षतप्रदारी

त्वां देव विश्वजनर्नी सुखलेनवीयाम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Devi! Those that worship Gangeśa, born of the above qualified Mahā Deva are awfully mistaken; they are especially quite ignorant of Thee, the Goddess of the Universe, that can be easily worshipped and that can give the fourfold aims of human existence.

वित्रं त्वयारिजनात्रापि द्वराद्र-

भावाब्द्वा रणे हितारशेर्यमिता धुलोकम् ।

नोचेत्वकर्मनिधिते निरये नितानं

दुःखातिछुःखगतिमाद्वमापतेसा ॥ 21 ॥

O Devi! It is out of Thy kindness that Thou hast slain with Thy arrows the enemies and thus hast translated them into Heavens; otherwise they would have certainly gone down to Hell owing to their own Karmic effects.

ब्रह्मा हरश हरित्यत गर्वीभावा-

ज्ञानस्ति तेक्षा विद्धया न तव प्रभावम् ।

कें-न्ने भवन्ति मनुजा विदितुं समर्थः।

संभोहितासव युगीरमितप्रभावः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Brahmā, Hari, Hara and the other Devas cannot realise Thy greatness; how can, then, ordinary men know Thee, when they are deluded by immeasurably strong Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities.

क्रिनश्यन्ति तेपि मुनवस्तव तुविंभाव्यं

पादाम्बुजं न हि भजन्ति विमूढचिता: ।

सूवार्णिनसेवनपरा: परमार्थतन्त्च ज्ञातं

न तैः श्रुतिगतरैपि वेदसारम् ॥ 23 ॥

O Mother! Those who do not worship Thy lotus-feet as very hard to be brought within this mind and therefore worship this visible Sun and Fire, they cannot grasp the Essence of the Vedas, demonstrated by hundreds of passages of Śruti; they are deluded and simply suffer pains.

मन्ये गुणात्सव भृवि प्रशितप्रभावाः।

कुर्यन्ति ये हि विमुखात्रनु भक्तिभावात् ।

लोकान्स्वबुद्धिरचितैर्विविधागमंशु

विष्यौरिभास्करणगेणरावत्थाय ॥ 24 ॥

O Mother! I think that the influences of Thy Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities are widely

known in this world; those qualities as taught in various deluding schools of Tantras by various persons, stimulate people to the worship of Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Sun and Gangeśa and thus detract them from worshipping Thee.

कुर्विति चे तत पदादिमुखाजराशयान- स्वोक्तामार्थैतिरावर्धनभक्तियोगैः । तेचां न कृष्यसि द्वयं कुर्वेप्रदिक्ये

त्वं तान्योहमन्यिनिपुणान्यथस्थलं च ॥ 25 ॥

O Mother! Those that detract thus the Brāhmaṇas from worshiping Thy lotus-feet and advise them through the Āgamas, to worship Hari, Hara and others, Thou dost not get angry with them, rather Thou dost shew Thy kindness to them and make them widely celebrated as possessing the occult powers of enchanting, bringing others under their control, or attracting towards them various other persons.

तूर्वे युगे भवति चातिवलं गुणस्य

तृर्व्येन तेन मथितान्यसदागमानि ।

त्वां गोपवन्ति निपुणा: कवयः कलौ वै

त्वकल्पित्यासुर्यगगानि संस्तुवन्ति ॥ 26 ॥

In the Satya Yuga, Sativa Guna was more powerful and therefore the untrue Śāstras could not rear their heads; but in this Kali Age, owing to the Satva Guna being not so powerful, the lower qualities have got preponderance; so these so called clever Pandits instead of worshipping Thee, worship Hari, Hara and the other Devas, the products of their fancy and hide Thee.

ध्यायपिति मुक्तिफलां घुवि योगसिद्धां

विद्यां पर्चा च मुनवोस्तिविशुद्धसत्ता: ।

ते नाप्युवर्ति जननीजरेते तु दुःखं

धन्यास्त एव मनुजास्तविय वे वित्तिना : 11 27 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Brahma Vidya, the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness, Thou givest liberation to Thy devotees when they succeed in their Yogas. Therefore the pure Sattvik Munis meditate on Thee and Thee alone. Those that get themselves diluted in Thee, they are very

Book V Chapter XIX

blessed; what more to speak of them in their praise, they will no longer have to suffer any pains in their mother's wombs!

विष्छक्तिरित परमात्मिने येन सोर्धि

व्यक्तो जगत्सु विदितो भवकृत्यक्तां ।

को2-मस्त्वया विरहितः प्रभवत्युष्मिन्कर्तुं

विद्धुर्विमि सघतिलतं स्वशलम्भा ॥ 28 ॥

O Mother! Thou art inherent as Cit Śakti (the power of consciousness) in the Supreme Spirit and therefore He is become manifest specially as this Great Cosmos and becomes known as the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of this world, fashioned out of five elements. O Devi! What male can by his own power work out this Jagat Prapañca, enjoy it and move in this, without the aid of Thy power.

तत्वानि चिवित्रितानि जगाधितुर्न

किं वा क्षामाणि जगाद्व यतो जड़ानि ।

किं चेन्रिदायाणि गुणकर्मवृतानि सन्ति

देवि तव्या चिकित्तिका फलं प्रवतुम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Bhagavatī! This universe has been created by Thee; Thou art, therefore, its Mother. The twenty-four Essences or Tattvas are inert; how can they without Thy Citśakti, create this universe? O Devi! Never can these senses and organs, endowed with Guna and Karma, do any work or bestow any fruits without Thy energy.

देवा मढ्रेब्धपि हुतं गुनिभि: स्वभागं

गृह्मीयुग्ब विधित्यतिपादितं किम।

स्वाहा न चेचस्मित तत्र निमितभूता

तस्मात्मेवे ननु पालयसीव विश्यु ॥ ३० ॥

O Mother! Wert thou not Svāhā, the instrumental cause in the sacrifice, how could the Devas have got their shares of the ghee offered in the Yajñas by the Munis! Therefore, O Devi! Thou art, no doubt, preserving this universe.

सर्वे तयेद्वापित्वं निवहितं भवादौ

त्वं पासि वे हरित्रप्रमुखान्दिगीणान ।

कालोर्जम विश्वापि ते चरितं भवाधों

जानन्ति नैव मनुजा: क्व नु मन्दभागया: ॥ 31 ॥

O Bhagavati! It is Thou that hast created this

world in the beginning; it is Thou that art preserving the gods Hari, Hara and others; it is Thou art destroying this universe. Therefore, O Brahman! The Devas cannot know Thy deeds; how can, then, the men who are of dull intellect, know Thee.

हत्वाउपुरं महिषक्रणधरं महोरं

माततस्वया सुरागण: किल रक्षितोउम् ।

कां ते स्तुति जननि मन्दधियो विद्यामो वेता

गार्त तत यथार्थतया न जगम्: ॥ 32 ॥

O Mother! Thou has now saved the Devas by killing this terrible Mahisāsura. O Mother! All the Vedas have not been able to know exactly all Thy movements; how can we, of dull intellect, praise Thee!

कार्यं कृतं जगति नो यदसौ

दुरात्मा वैरी हतो घुवनकंटकतुर्बिधायः ।

कीति: कृता ननु जगतयु कृपा विधेय।

उपसमांधि याति जननि प्रक्षितप्रभावे ॥ 33 ॥

O Mother! Thou has served our cause by killing our enemy, the wicked Dānava, the inconceivable source of pain to all the world; by this act of Thine, Thy fame has spread far and wide in this universe; therefore, O Thou of renowned prowess! Thou art the Mother of this world; save us, and maintain us by Thy mercy.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी तानुवाच घुतुस्वग ।

अन्यत्कारं च दुःसाध्यं बुवन्तु सुरसना: ॥ 34 ॥

यदा यदा हि देवानां कार्ये स्यादितुर्पुंटम् ।

समतैव्याङ्गं तदा शीघं नागरविष्यामि चापदम् ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The Devas having praised the Devi thus, the Devi addressed them gently: "O Devas! Say it you have any other difficult thing for Me to do; remember Me whenever any difficult crisis to you; I will destroy that evil.

देवा ऊचुः

सर्वे कृत्ते त्वया देपे कवर्न नः खलु साम्पतम् ।

घटयं निहतः श्रुत्रमाकां महिषासुरः ॥ ३६ ॥

The Devas said: "O Devi! All our purposes

have been served when Thou hast killed lately our enemy Mahisāsura.

सारित्यामो यथा तेज्य सदैव पदपूक्नम् ।

तबा कुरु जन्यन्तर्पिक्त लव्य्ययच्छुततम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now dost Thou do for us so that we can always recollect Thy lotus feet, and our Bhakti be firm and steadfast towards Thee.

अपराधसहस्वाणि मातैव सहते सदा ।

इति जात्वा जगद्योति न भजने कुतो जना: ॥ 38 ॥

It is only the Mother that bears the thousand offences of the son; we, therefore, cannot say why men, knowing this, do not worship the Mother of the Universe.

ढ़ो सुभाणीं तु देहेस्मितयोः सख्यं नितन्तम ।

नान्यः सखा तृनीयोप्रति योगपरां सहोत ॥ ३ ३ ९ ॥

There are two birds always dwelling in this body, Jivātmā (human soul) and the Paramāmtā (the Supreme Soul). They are so very intimate friends towards each other that they never separate. But there is no other third friend that can bear the faults of these two.

तस्माजीवः सखायं त्वां हित्वा किं नु कारिष्यत ।

पाणतामा मन्दभायोउसी सुरामानुवधोनिषु ॥ 40 ॥

Therefore the embodied soul that forsakes Thee, his friend, can never attain any welfare; what more to as on this! That vicious soul is very unlucky amidst the Devas and men, no doubt.

प्राप्य देहं सुतुष्पारं न सभरेनां नराधम: ।

मनसा कर्माण वाचा बुभः सत्यं पुनः पुनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

He who on attaining this excellent human body, attained with much difficulty, does not remember Thee frequently by words and deeds, is certainly the vilest of men.

सुखे वाध्यव बा दुःखे वं नः शरणमद्धूनम् ।

पाहि नः सत्तत देवि सर्वैस्त्व वरायपुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

अन्यथा शरणं नासि त्वरवंबुंजरेणुतः ।

O Devi! Whether in times of distress or happiness, Thou art our Saviour; therefore dost Thou protect us with Thy best weapons. O Devi! There is no other means of our security than the Grace of the dust of Thy Feet.

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी तकैवांतरधीयत ॥ 43 ॥

विसयं परमं जगमूदैवास्ता वीक्ष्य निर्नातम् ।

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पद्धमस्कन्दे

एकानिविशोरप्रदाय: 11 19 11

Vyāsa said: “O king! The Devas having prayed to the Devi thus, the Devi vanished then and there. The Devas, seeing the disappearance of the Devi, were sufficiently struck with surprise.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the prayer and hymns to the Devi in Śrīmaddevi-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XX

On the Peace of the World

जनमेजय उवाच

अथादभुतं वीक्ष्य मुने प्रभावं

देल्या जान्छोतिकरं परं च ।

न दृष्टिनरित्त डिजवयं शुपवतः

कथामृतं ने मुख्यघज्ञानम् ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: “O best of Rsis! I have now seen the wonderful excellent deeds of the Devi for the enhancement of peace in this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar-like words, still I am not satisfied.”

अन्तर्हितायां च तदा घवात्यां

चढ़कृ शिके देवपुरोगामासते ।

देव्याश्रिरिं गर्पப் पविंत्र

दुरापमेवास्पपुषेर्नीराणाम् ॥ २ ॥

O best of Munis! What did the chief Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me.

O Bhagavan! I think those Jivas cannot fully comprehend these excellent sacred deeds of the Devi, that are less fortunate and have done not many meritorious deeds in this world.

Book V Chapter XX

कसूचितमापोति कथामुतेन

प्रिज्ञोउत्पश्याल्यादुकर्णरंध : 1

पौतेन येनामरता प्रयाति प्रित्चान्

नगत् चे न चिवलित सादरम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Muni! What to speak of the less fortunate souls, even the Mahātmās who are versed in hearing such things, can hardly be satiated on hearing the Devi's deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not hear of these things, the essence of essences, on hearing which men become Immortals.

सीलावरिंत्रे जगद्धिक्वाया

स्थान्वितं देवमहामुनीनाम् ।

संसारावर्शितरणं नराणां

कर्थ कृतजा हिं परित्यजेयु:॥ 4 ॥

The Mother's Līlā is to preserve the Devas as well as the great Munis and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross this ocean of world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her?

मृताक्षा ये चैव मुभुबवश

संसारिणो रोगयुताक्ष केचित् ।

तेषां सदा शोजपूटैक्ष पेयं

सर्वार्थवैं देवविदो वर्दिनि ५ ५ ॥

The Pandits versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devi's life is able to fulfil all the desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want liberation, the wordly souls, the diseased all ought to drink incessantly the nectar-like nectar of Devi's doings.

तथा विशेषेण मुने तृपाणां

धार्मिकामेषु सदा ततानाम् ।

मृताका यमातखलु तत्वयांति

कर्थ न येयं रहितेह तेभ्यः ॥ 6 ॥

Especially the kings that are engaged in Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments, ought to hear Her life. O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the nectar-like doings of the Devi, what doubt can there be with the ordinary human beings, to listen with rapt devotion those wondrous things! O Best of Munis!

ये: पूजिता पूर्वंभवे भवानी

सलुक्नटुपर्थेय चम्पकैक्न ।

बैल्वैर्वैलैसे पुवि वेभागुक्ता

नृपा घबन्तीलनृयेयये 17 11

It is those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī in their previous births with beautiful Kunda flowers, Campaka flowers and Bel leaves, they have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of rich enjoyments.

वे भक्तिहीनः समवाय्य देई

तं मानुर्ष भारतभूमिभानो ।

वैर्नांक्षिता ते धन्यान्यहीना

रोगान्विता: सन्तत्वर्जिता ॥ 8 ॥

And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this human body in the land of Bharata and did not worship the Mother Goddess, they are, in their present births, without grains and riches, diseased, and void of any issues.

प्रभाति निव्यं किल दासभृता

आज्ञाका: केवलभारवाहा: ।

दिवानिंशं स्वार्थपरा: क्वार्थ

नैवापुब्ल्वौदारुप्तिमानघ। १ ९ ॥

Wander they always as servants, carrying out orders, and bearing only the burden loads; day and night, they seek for their own selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly full meals.

अन्याधु स्काना वधिराशु खंत्रा:

कृष्णवित्ता ये भृवि दुः:खपानः ।

तत्रानुमन्त कविषिध्विधेयं

नाराधिता तै: सन्तं भवानी ॥ 10 ॥

The blind, deaf and dumb, lame and lepers suffer pain and misery in this earth; seeing them, it should be inferred that-never worshipped the Goddess Bhavānī.

ये राजभोगान्तवरक्षिपुर्णी:

संलेब्यमाना बहुविभिनुघे: ।

दूर्यंति ये वा विषचैः

संसोतर्से: पूजितास्वेत्यनुयेमयेव ॥ १ १ ॥ ॥

And those that are wealth, prosperous, attended by numerous attendants and are always enjoying, like kings, it is to be inferred that they certainly worshipped the lotus feet of the Mother Goddess in their past lives.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

तस्मास्त्रवर्तीभूनो देल्याश्रितमुक्तभम् ।

कथयस्य कृपां कृत्वा दयावानसि साम्यन्तम् ॥ 12 ॥

Therefore O Son of Satyavati! As you are kind-hearted, kindly narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devi.

हवा तं महिषं पांच सृत्ता सम्पूक्तिता सुरैः ।

केव गता सा महलक्ष्मी: सर्वतेज:समुद्ध्वा ॥ 13 ॥

O best of Munis! Where did the Goddess, Mahā Lakṣmī, created out of the energies of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahisāsura and had been worshipped and praised by the Devas?

कथितं ते महाभाग नातित्यन्माणु सा ।

स्वरों वा मृत्युलोके वा संस्थता भूवनेश्वरी ॥ 14 ॥

तयं पता वा तत्रैव वैकुण्टे वा समाधिता ।

अथवा हेमग्रेल सा तत्त्वो मे वदाधुना ॥ 15 ॥

O highly Fortunate one! You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like to know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the Land of Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She descend to Vaikuntha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O Muni! Narrate all these duly before me.

यास उवाच

पूर्व मया ते कथितं मणिह़ीयं मनोहतम् ।

क्रीडास्थानं सदा देया वललभं परयं स्मृतम् ॥ 16 ॥

यत्र बहा हरि: स्थाणु: कौभायां ते प्रेपेदेरे ।

पुरुकत्वं पुनः प्राय्य स्वानि कार्याणि चिक्रे ।। 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! I told you before about the beautiful Mani Dvīpa; that island is the place of sport to the Devi and very dear to Her. In that place Brahmā, Visnu, Mahādeva were transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were engaged in their respective duties.

सः सुभातिर्यमध्येस्ति हीपः परमशोभनः ।

नानारष्टे: सदा तत्र विहारं कुकतेश्विका ॥ १ ८ ॥

That place is grand and splendid and is in the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devi Ambika assumes various forms there as She likes; and She sports there.

स्तुता सुंपुक्ति देहः सा तत्रेव गता शिका ।

यत्र संकीडोत नित्यं मायाशक्ति: सन्तान्ति ॥ 19 ॥

देवास्ता निर्गति बीक्ष्य देहीं सर्वेश्रिं तथा ।

रविवर्गोदूवं चकुभूमिपालं महावलम् ॥ 20 ॥

To that Mani Dvipa the auspicious Devi departed after She had been praised by the Gods, to that place where sports always the eternal Bhagavati Bhuvanesvari, the incarnate of Para Brahma.

अयोध्याप्रापितं वीरं श्रकुनं नाम पार्थिवम् ।

सर्वलक्षणासम्पत्रं महिष्यासने शुणे ॥ 21 ॥

When the Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas installed, on the throne of Mahisāsura, the powerful King Śatrughna, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ayodhyā and descended from the Solar line.

दत्वा राज्यं तदा तम्बे द्वा इन्द्रुपुर्गमाः ।

स्वकीर्वेहीईः सर्वे जगयुः स्वान्यालयारिति ॥ 22 ॥

After making him thus the King, Indra and the other Devas went to their respective abodes on their own conveyances.

गतेषु तेषु देवेषु पृथिवयं पृथिवीपते ।

धर्मारभे बभूवाथ प्रजाङ्ध सुचित्रास्तथा ॥ 23 ॥

O King! The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects were governed on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their times in ease and comfort.

पर्जनः: कालवर्षी च धरा धान्यगुणावृता ।

पादायः फलपुथाल्वा बभूवुः सुख्वतः सदा ॥ 24 ॥

It used to rain, then, timely and the earth was covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the trees were all filled with fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to people.

गावछ श्रीस्म्यजा घटोट्यः कामदा नृणाम् ।

नडः सुमर्गाः स्वच्छः श्रीतोदा: खगसंसुतः ॥ 25 ॥

The cows with their udders full like earthen pots gave such a profuse quantity of milk that men began to milk them whenever they liked! The rivers waters were all clear and cooling; and they flowed full in regular channels; the birds grouped round them.

ब्राह्मणा वेदतत्वाक्ष यजकर्मततास्या ।

क्षत्रिया धार्मेयुक्ता दानाध्ययन्ततपरा: ॥ 26 ॥

Book V Chapter XX

शल्सविद्याता नियं प्रजारक्षणतप्तः ।

न्यादवण्डधरा: सर्वे राजन: शमसर्वुतः ॥ 27 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas; versed in the Vedas, were engaged in performing sacrifices; The Kṣattriyas observed their virtues and were engaged in doing charities and in their education; the kings held their rods of justice and were engaged in governing their subjects; though the several kings were busy with various arms and weapons, they all became fond of peace.

अवियोधस्तु भूतानां सर्वेषां संबंचुर ह ।

आक्रता धनदातुर्ण जजा गोयुधसंयुता: ॥ 28 ॥

Thus no wars nor quarrels were seen amongst the subjects; and the mines yielded plenty of wealth to the people.

ब्राह्मणाः क्षितिवा वैश्याः शूग्राक्ष तृप्सस्तत ॥

देवीभक्तिपरा: सर्वे संबवृष्टिताले ॥ 29 ॥

O best of Kings! There were the Brāhmanas, Kṣatriyas, Vaīśyas and Śūdras who; became the devotees of the Goddess.

सर्वेय न्यून्याप्रा मण्डपाध्य मनोहरा: ।

महैः पूर्णा धराधासन् ब्राहणीः क्षिविः क्रौः। 30 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas used, then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at every nook and corner in this globe, the sacrificial altars and the sacrificials posts became visible.

पतिन्तमत्या नार्ये: सुर्गालितः सत्यसंयुतः ।

पितृष्णसित्पर: पूत्रा आसन्यमंपरायणः ॥ ३१ ॥

न पाखण्डं न वासधम्: कुत्रापि पृथिवीतले ।

वेदवादा: शास्त्रवादा नान्ये वादास्तवादप्रवन्द् ॥ ३२ ॥

The female sex became gentle and of good behaviour, truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively. Atheism and unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the earth; the people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the Śāstras that did not go in contradistinction to the Vedas.

कलहों नैव कैमाधित्र दैन्य नैगुधा मिति: ।

स्वयं सुविज्ञो लोका: काले च मरुण तथा ॥ 33 ॥

सुहादं न विवोगश्रा नावद्धकं हवाचन ।

नानावृष्टिनं तुर्भिक्षं न मारी दुःखदानुणम् ॥ 34 ॥

Nobody liked to quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were checked; the people everywhere relied in happiness. Untimely death was not there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no distress was seen.

न रोगों न च मालस्यं न विलोधः परमयम् ।

सर्वेत्र सुयुसंघना नरा नारंः सुखाचित्यः ॥ 35 ॥

Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were out of sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and quarrels vanished.

क्रीड़िति मानवा: सर्वे स्वर्ग देवणगा इव ।

न चोरा न च पाखण्डा वकुका टंभकासना ॥ 36 ॥

यिशुना लम्यटा: सक्था न बच्युस्तदा नृप ।

न वेदद्वेषण: पापा मानवा: पृथिवीपते ॥ 37 ॥

O King! all men and women began to sport merrily everywhere like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, vanity, hypocrisy, lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings were not to be seen.

सर्वे धर्माति नित्यं द्विज्ञसेवापरायणः ।

विशालात्यष्टिध्यमैय विविधा ब्राह्मास्ततः ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then extremely devoted to their Dharma and engaged in serving the Brāhmanas.

सात्चिका राजसाश्रैव तामसाश्र तथापरे ।

सर्वे वेदविदो द्वशः सात्चिका: सत्यवृत्तयः ॥ 39 ॥

The Brāhmins were also, according to the three-fold plan of the creation, Sāttvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik.

प्रतिश्रद्धिरीन्त्रा दयादमपरायण: ।

यज्ञले सात्चिकरोः कुवाणि धर्मतत्पर: ॥ 40 ॥

The Sāttvik Brāhmins were all versed in the Vedas, clever and truthful; they were kind, they controlled their passions and they did not accept any presents from others.

पुरोडागधियानैश पशुपिंमं कदाचन ।

दाममध्ययनं चैव यजनं तु तृतीयकम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Filled with their ideas of Dharma, they used to perform their Purodāsa and other such sacrifices

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

with sāttvik rice, etc., but never, did they immolate any animals.

Note: Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation.

त्रिकर्मसिकास्ते वै सात्पिका ब्राह्मणा नृप ।

राजसा वेदविद्धांसः क्षत्रियाणां पुरोहितः ॥ 4 2 ॥

O King! The Sāttvik Brāhmaṇas gave charities, studied the Vedas and offered sacrifices for themselves. These were their three ordainate actions. They were busy in these.

यदकर्मनितरातः सर्वे विधित्वन्यासभक्षतः ।

यजनं याजनं दानं तथैव च प्रतिग्रहः ॥ 4 3 ॥

O King! The Rājaskī Brāhmaṇas were versed in the Vedas and acted as priests to the Kṣattiryas and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy with their six duties.

अध्ययनं तु वेदानां तथैवाध्यायनं तु पट् ।

तामसा: कोधिसंयुक्ता रागदेषपरा: पुनः । ४। ४। ॥

They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, assisted others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and taught others the Vedas. The Tāmasik Brāhmaṇas were engry, attached to worldly objects, and jealous.

राजां कर्मकार नित्यं किंचिद्ध्ययने रता: ।

महिषे निर्हते सर्वे सुचित्वो वेदततरायः ॥ 4 5 ॥

They studied very little of the Vedas and spent most of their time in serving the kings.

वभ्युद्रतिनिण्यात तदानधर्मपरासवा ।

क्षत्रिया: पालने युक्ता क्षेयया वाणिजयुत्तयः ॥ 46 ॥

O King! Mahisāsura was killed, all the Brāhmanas were glad and began to practise Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made charities.

कृपिवाणिज्ञगोर्श्राकृसीद्वृत्तयः परे ।

एवं प्रयुवित्तो लोको महिष्ये विनिपातिते ॥ 47 ॥

The Kṣaṭtīryas began to govern the subjects, the Vaiśyas carried on their trading business and the other tribes went on with their agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on interest. Thus all men became very glad on the death of Mahisa.

अनुहितः प्रजानों ने संवधून धरायगाः ।

बहुक्षीगः शुभा गावो नट्यशेब बहुदकाः ॥ 48 ॥

Devoid of cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The cows were endowed with auspicious signs and gave plenty of milk and the rivers flowed full of waters.

वृक्षा बहुकलाशास्मानावा रोगवर्जिताः ।

नाधयो नेतय: ब्वाणि प्रजानां दुःखदायकः ॥ 49 ॥

The trees looked splendid with abundance of fruits; men were without diseases in short, people had no mental agony and too much or too little of rains were not there; Śālavas, mice, birds, and seditions were not extant.

न निधनमुपवाति प्राणिनस्तेध्यकाले

सकलविघवयुक्ता रोगहीना: सदैव ।

निर्माविहित्तधर्मे तस्पशुषिकानायाशरण-

सरसिजानां सेवने दत्तचिता: ॥ 50 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पद्रामकन्ये

विशोभायाः ।। 20 ।।

O king! The beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed, incessantly, their full health and possessed lots of riches; especially all beings, engaged in the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Candjikā and thus spent their lives.

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of the world in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahasi

Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXI

On the Conquest of the Heavens by Śumbha and Niśumbha

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवश्यामि देल्याशितमुत्तमम् ।

सुखदे सर्वेजन्तूनां सर्वेपापणज्ञानम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsā said: O king! I am describing to you that excellent pure life and doings of the Devī that destroy all the sins of all the beings and make them happy.

Book V Chapter XXI

यथा शुभ्यो निशुभ्यश्छ प्रातारी बलवतरो ।

बभूवतुमहावीरीं आयधौे पुनर्षे: किल 112 ||

बहुसेनावृतौ शृती देवानां दुःखदी सव ।

दुराषारी मदोलिस्त्री बहुदानवसंयुती ॥ 3 ॥

In days of yore, there were two very powerful demons Šumbha and Niśumbha; they were two brothers, strong heroes and invulnerable by the male persons. Those two wicked Asuras were surrounded with numerable Dānavas; they tormented always the Devas.

हताविथिकया ती तु संधामे उतीव दारुण ।

देवानां च हिताधाय सर्वै: परिचरैः सह ॥ ४ ॥

वशप्रमुक्ती महाबाहु तत्कवीजोस्तिदारूणः ।

पूमतोचननामा च निद्रासते रपाणेणे ॥ ५ ॥

Then the Goddess Ambikā, for the good of the Devas, killed Śumbha and Niśumbha with all their attendants in a very dreadful battle. In the battlefield the Devi killed their main assistants Caṇḍa Mundā and the exceedingly terrible Rakta Bīja and Dhūmralocana.

तश्रिल्य सुराणों सा जहार भयमुत्मम् ।

सुता सम्पजिता देवेंगिरी हेमावलें सुभे ॥ 6 ॥

When the Devi destroyed those Dānavas, the Devas became fearless; the Devas then went to the beautiful Sumeru mountain and praised Her and chanted hymns to Her.

राजोवाच

कथितावसुरावाटी कर्थ ती बलिनां वरी ।

केन संस्थापिति चेह्छीवध्यलं कुतो गती ॥ 7 ॥

Hearing about the names of Śumbha and Niśumbha, Janamejaya asked: O best of Munis! Who were those two Asuras? How came they to be most powerful? Who put them here? Why were they vulnerable to women only?

तपसा वरदानेन कस्य जाती महाकलो ।

कर्थं न नित्ती सर्वं कथयस्य सवितस्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

Under whose tapasyā and under whose boon did they become so strong? And why did that great Devi kill them? Describe all these to me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

शूण्र राजन्कथां दिव्यां संर्विपण्णाशिनीम् ।

देव्याश्रितसंयुक्तो सर्वार्थफिलयं शुभम् ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King: I am describing to you that beautiful anecdote where the Devi's holy deeds are involved Hear. This incident full of all that is good, destroys the hearer's all sins and grants them all their desired ends.

पुरा सुभनिरुभी द्वावसुरी भूमिमण्डले ।

पातालनाड्य सम्पानी भारती सुभन्दर्शनी ॥ 10 ॥

In days of yore, Sumbha and Niśumbha, the two fair and good looking brothers came out of Pātāla to this earth.

तौ प्राप्तवीच्चे चैव चोर्तुस्तप उतमम् ।

अम्रेकं परित्यज्य पुक्रले लोकपावने ॥ 1 1 ॥

These two Asuras, when they grew to their manhood, performed severe asceticism in Puskara, the holy place of pilgrimage, the most purifying place in this world and they refused to eat rice and water.

वर्षणाममूर्त यावह्योगविद्यापरायणी ।

एकत्रैवासनं कृत्वा तेपते पर्भं तपः ॥ १ १ १ ॥

They became so very skilled in their Yoga practices that they passed away in their one posture and seat one Ayuta (10,000) years. Thus they performed very difficult tapasyā.

तयोस्तुईपन्द वर्जा सर्वेलोकपितामहः ।

तत्रागतश भगवानाकृ वरदायितम् ॥ 13 ॥

Then God Brahmā, the Grandsire of all, became pleased with their asceticism and appeared before them, riding on His vehicle, the Swan.

तावृषी च जानलक्षा दृष्टवा ध्यानपरी स्थिति ।

उत्तिष्ठत महापानी तुहोर्ह तपसा किल ॥ 14 ॥

The Creator, seeing them thus deeply merged in meditation, asked them to get up from that state and told them thus: "I have become pleased with your asceticism.

व्यास उवाच

वाक्षित्नं वा वरं कामं द्वादिष बुवतामिह ।

कामवोद्रं समायातो दृष्ट्वा वां तपासे बलम् ॥ 15 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

I fulfil the desires of all the Lokas; I have now come to you, pleased to see you so very strong in your ascetic practices; better ask your desired boons from me; I will grant them to you."

इति श्रुत्वा वचस्तस्य प्रपूब्दी तौ स्माहित्ति ।

प्रदक्षिणकिं कृत्वा प्राणामं चक्रतुस्तद् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O king! Hearing thus the Grandsire’s words, Śumbha and Niśumbha got up from their meditation; concentrating their attention towards Him, circumambulated Him and bowed down to Him with their hearts full of reverence.

द्पड्वतृष्णिपाणतं च कृत्वा ती दुबैलाकृती ।

क्रवतुर्भूगं वाचं दौनौ गद्धद्या गिरा ॥ 17 ॥

देवदेव द्वासिन्यो भक्तानामययद ।

अमरतं च नी बढ़ादेहि तुहो3स चेढिभो ॥ 18 ॥

The two Asuras were very weak, lean and thin by their tapasāy and they looked very humble. They fell down before Him like a piece of wood and began to speak in a sweet voice, choked by intense feelings. O Brahman! O Deva of the Devas! O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O Destroyer of fear of the devotees! O Lord! If Thou art pleased then dost Thou grant us immortality.

सरणादरं किक्रिद्धरं नास्ति धरातले ।

तस्माद्वारच्च संसर्ती युधाकं ग्ररण गतो ॥ 19 ॥

There is nothing in this world more fearful then death; we two have taken refuge unto Thee, being afraid of this death.

श्राङ् तवे देवदेवेश जगकर्तेः क्षामिधे ।

परिस्मोटय विश्वानस्वो मरणबं भवम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of mercy! O Creator of the world! O Lord of the Devas! O Universal Soul! Protect us from this fear due to the terrible Death.

बह्योवाच

किमिद प्रार्थनीयं वो विपरितं तु सर्वथा ।

ओदेवं सर्वथा सर्वैंः सर्वैभ्यो भुवनत्रये ॥ 21 ॥

Brahmā said: Is this the boon that you ask? This is in every way, against the Law of Nature; for no one, in these three Lokas, can grant this boon to anybody.

जातस्य हि घुवो मृत्युधूवं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

मयंदा विहिता लोके पूर्व विश्रकृता किल १ 2 2 १

When one becomes born, one must die; and when one dies, one must be born again. This Law is ordained in this world by the Supreme Creator of this Universe, from time immemorial.

मतैर्व सर्वाय सर्वैः प्राणिभिनान्ने संशयः ।

अन्य प्राधिवतं कामं द्वादिम यच्च वाजिडलम् ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore all the beings must die; there is no doubt in this. Better ask any other boon that you desire; I will grant that to you.

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णं ववस्तस्य सुविमृष्य च दानवी ।

क्रन्तुः प्राणियलाय बह्वाणां पुतः स्थितम् ॥ 24 ॥

पुरुविर्यगईय मानवैर्मुपाधिषिः ।

अवध्यतं कृपासिंधो देहै ने वाज्छितं वम् ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the words of Brahmā, the two Dānavas pondered over the matter and bowed down to the Prajāpati, the Lord of the Creation and said: O Merciful One! Grant us then so that we shall be invulnerable to any of the male of the Immortal Devas down to human beings and birds and deers; this is the boon that we ask.

नारी बल्वती क्रास्तित या नी नार्गं कार्विति ।

न विभीव: सिक्य: कामं जैतोलये सचारचरे ॥ 26 ॥

Where exists the woman so powerful as to kill us? We never fear any woman in all the three Lokas.

अवस्थी प्रात्ती स्यातां नोन्यः पडूजोद्व ।

भयं न रहीजनेभ्यश्व सभाबाद्वला हि स ॥ 27 ॥

O Lotus-born! We, the two brothers, want not to be killed by any male; the females are naturally weak; therefore we need not fear them.

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा तयोर्वांयं प्रद्वी वांक्षितं वरम् ।

बह्मा प्रसमन्सता जगगाय श्वयालयम् ॥ 28 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing their words, the Grandsire Brahmā gladly granted them their desired boon and returned to His own abode.

Book V Chapter XXI

गतेउथ भवने तस्मिन्नवनी स्वगृहं गतो ।

घुंगु पुरोहित कृत्वा चक्रतुः पूजनं तदा ॥ 29 ॥

गुषे दिने सुन्वशे जातकलपयं शुभम् ।

कृत्वा सिंहासनं दिव्यं राज्यार्थ प्रददौ सुनि: ॥ 30 ॥

On Brahman going away, the two Dānavas, too, returned to their own places. They then appointed the Muni Bhrgu as their priest and began to worship him. Bhrgu, the best of the Munis, then, on an auspicious day and when the star was benign, got a beautiful golden throne built and gave it to the king.

नुभाय जेषषुभृत्य ददी रज्ञासनं शुभम् ।

सेवनार्थ तदेवायुं सम्पाता दानवोतनाः ॥ 31 ॥

Šumbha, being the eldest, was then installed on the auspicious throne as the king; the other brave and excellent demons began to assemble there quickly for serving him.

चण्डपुण्डी महावीशे भ्रातरी बतदार्थिति ।

सग्रामती सैन्यसंयुक्ती रथवाजिजाजानिवती ॥ 32 ॥

The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Munḍa, proud on account of their great strength came there with their large armies, chariots, horses, and elephants.

धूपतेणीचनामा च तदुपश्णविक्रमः ।

गृधं च धृपतिं श्रुत्वा तद्धग्राहुलसंयुतः ॥ 33 ॥

Similarly the valiant warriors Dhūmralocana, hearing the Śumbha had become their King, came there with his own army.

रत्कबीजलथा शूरो वरदानबलाधिकः ।

अश्वौहिणीभयं संयुक्तस्तदैवागत्य संतः ॥ 34 ॥

There came up also at that time the great warrior Rakta Bija, more powerful on account of his getting a boon, attended by his army of two Aksauhini soldiers.

तस्यैकं कारणं राजन्संग्रामे युध्यते: सदा ।

देहाद्धीयसमाप्तसत्य शस्त्रहातस्य च ।। ३५ ।।

जायते च यदा भूमावुल्यघ्ने ह्मनेकश: ।

तातृषा: पुरुषा: कृरा बह्वः शक्रपाणयः ॥ ३६ ॥

O King! Hear why this Rakta Bija became so very unconquerable; whenever this Asura was

wounded by any weapons, if one drop of blood fell on the ground, at once would be created so many innumerable Asuras, resembling his wicked nature and with similar weapons in their hands.

सभ्यचित्त तदाकास्तद्वुपास्तत्यास्कमाः ।

युद्धे पुनस्ते कुवंति पुरुषा रक्तस्मध्याः ॥ 37 ॥

The Asuras born of this blood would have similar appearances and would be similar in strength and ready to fight at once when they were born.

अतः सोर्धि महावीर्यः संगामेतीव दुर्बयः ।

अवध्यः सर्वभूताना रक्तकीजो महासुरः ॥ 38 ॥

That great warrior, the great Demon Rakta Bija was unconquerable in battle for this very reason and no being could now kill him.

अन्ये च बह्वः श्रास्त्रानुकुममित्यतः ।

गुर्णं च नूपति मत्वा बभुस्तस्य सेवकाः ॥ 39 ॥

The other Asuras, when they heard that Śumbha had become their king, came up there with their armies consisting of four division of elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry and began to serve him.

असंख्यात तदा जाता सेना गुभ्यनिरूपम्बयोः ।

पृथिव्या: सकलं राज्यं गृहीतं बलतवता ॥ 40 ॥

The army of Śumbha and Niśumbha thus became countless; and they forcibly conquered and got possession of all the kingdoms that existed then on the surface of the earth.

सेनायोगं तदा कृवा निरुभंः परवीरा ।

जगाम तसा स्वर्ग सचीपतिजायय च ॥ 4 1 ॥

Then Niśumbha, the destroyer of enemies, collected his army and marched up to the Heavens without any delay to conquer Indra, the Lord of Śacī.

चकासासी महायुद्धं लोकपातैः समन्ततः ।

ब्रुगहा बघपानेत ताउदयामास वक्षासि ॥ 42 ॥

He fought very hard with all the Lokapālas on all sides when Indra struck him on his breast with His thunderbolt.

स बज्ञाधिकृत्तो भूमी परपात दानवानुजः ।

भरने बलं तदा तस्य निर्गुभंस्य महात्मनः ॥ 43 ॥

Nisūmbha fell unconscious on the ground with that blow when his soldiers, defeated in the battle, fled away on all sides.

भातरं मृद्धितं श्रुला शुंभः परवलादीनः ।

तथागत्य सुरानस्विताउदयामास सायकैः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Sümbha, the destroyer of the enemy forces, hearing the unconscious state of the younger brother, came up at once on the field and shot at the Devas with multitudes of arrows.

कृतं युद्धे महनेन रुभेनाविलक्षकर्भण ।

निर्जितस्तु सुरा: सर्वे संद्रा: पालाशु सर्वेण: ॥ 4 5 ॥

The untiring Šumbha fought so violently that Indra and the other Devas and Lokapālas were defeated.

ऐन्हे पदं तदा तेन गृहीतं बलवतया ।

कल्यादावसंयुक्ते कामधेयुसमावित्यम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

Šumbha then took away, perforce, the position of Indra and he occupied the Celestial Tree and Heavenly milching cow that yielded all desires and other excellent things over which Indra used to reign.

त्रैलोक्यं व्यभागाश्र हातलनेन महात्मना ।

नन्दनं च वनं प्रायय मुविता5भूम्हाहसुरः ॥ 47 ॥

सुयायाश्वे पानेन सुखमाप महासुरः ।

कुबेरं स च निविलेन तस्य राज्यं चकार ॥ 48 ॥

In fact, that high-souled Asura got the dominion of the three Lokas and took away all those that were offered at the sacrifices. He became highly glad on getting the Nandana Garden and was extremely delighted when he drank the celestial nectar. He then defeated in battle Kubera, the god of wealth and occupied his kingdom.

अधिकारं तथा भानो: शशिनऊ चकार है ।

यमे चैव विनिर्जित्व जग्राह तत्वद तथा ॥ 49 ॥

He defeated the Moon, Sun, and Yama, the God of Death and occupied their positions.

वर्णस्य तथा राज्यं चक्रात बहिकमं च ।

वायोः कार्य निरुभष्ठ चक्रा स्वबान्धित्वः ॥ 50 ॥

Surrounded by his army, Niśumbha dispossessed Varuna, Fire, and Air of their kingdoms and began to reign in their stead.

ततो देवा विनिर्मूता हृतराज्या हताश्रियः ।

संत्वज्ञ नन्दनं सर्वे निर्वंषुर्गिरगुढ़े ॥ 51 ॥

Thus deprived of their kingdoms, prosperity and wealth, the Devas left the Nandana Garden and fled, out of terror, to the caves of hills and mountains.

हताधिकाराले सर्वे बधमुष्विंजने वने ।

निरालबा निराधाग निरलेजका निरगुधाः ॥ 52 ॥

Thus deprived of all their rights, the Devas without any weapons, without any lustre, with out any home, and without anywhere to go, began to wander in lonely forests.

विदेश्रमर: सर्वे पर्वतानां गृहासु च ।

उद्यानेषु च शून्येषु नदीनां गह्रेशु च ॥ 53 ॥

न प्रापुले सुखं स्वायीय स्थानप्रध विवेस्तः ।

लोकमाला महाराज देवाधीनं सुखं किल ॥ 54 ॥

O King! All the Immortals began to knock about in lonely gardens, mountain caves and rivers; and nowhere they found happiness; for happiness depends entirely unto the hands of Fate.

बलवन्तो महाभागा बहुजा धनसंयुतः ।

काले कुःखं तथा दैन्यमानुवक्ति नाराधि ॥ 55 ॥

चिग्मेतनमहाराज कालस्येव विचेहितम् ।

यः कोरिते नरं तावराजानं चिथ्युंक ततः ॥ 56 ॥

दातारं याचकं चैव बलन्तवं तथावजलम् ।

पिछतं विकलं कामं गूरं चातीव कातम् ॥ 57 ॥

O Lord of men! Even those fortunate souls, who are powerful, and wealthy and wise, meet at times with distress and poverty. O King! How marvellous are the ways and manners of Time! It makes kings and donors beggars; it renders the powerful, weak; literates, illiterates; and it makes great warriors into terrible cowards.

मखानां च शर्त कृत्वा प्रायेत्रासनुतमम् ।

पुनईःखं परं प्राप्त कालस्य गतिरीदुर्गी ॥ 58 ॥

O King! Vāsava performed one hundred horse-sacrifices and got the excellent Indra's position; but again he fell into extreme difficulties; thus runs the wheel of Time.

कालः कारोति धर्मिईं पुरुषं ज्ञानसंयुक्तम् ।

तमेवातीय पाधिष्ठं ज्ञानलैशविवर्जितम् ॥ ५ ९ ॥

Book V Chapter XXII

It is Time that bestows the gem of knowledge to a person and it is Time again that deprives that very same man of his wisdom and makes him a great sinner.

न विस्मयोउर कतैव्यः सर्वथा कालचेहिते ।

ब्रहाविष्युहरातीनापपीद्रककष्टचेहितम् ॥ 6 0 ॥

विष्यूजनन्यानपोनि सूकाराविष्यु योनिषु ।

इरः कपाली सघातः कालेनैव बलौरियस ॥ 6 1 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे पश्मस्कन्थे

भगवतीमाहामनये एकविशोउध्याय: ॥ 21 ॥ ||

The Bhagavān Viṣṇu takes incarnations, under the control of Time, in several lower wombs as boar, etc., and Mahā Deva carries on His body the human skulls, that are not even fit to be touched. When Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and others suffer such painful things, then one need not wonder at the workings of the Great inscrutable Time.

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conquest of the Heavens by Śumbha and Niśumbha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXI

CHAPTER XXII

On Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

पराजिता: सुरा: सर्वे राज्यं रुष्मः शशास ह ।

एवं वर्षेसूरसं तु जगाम नृपसत्तम ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! When the Devas were all defeated, Śumbha began to govern all their kingdoms; thus one thousand years passed away.

प्रशताय्नास्तातो देवाश्रित्नामापु: सुदुस्तगम् ।

गुरुं दु:खातुराते तु पप्रब्धुरिवदाना: ॥ 2 ॥

The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their kingdoms, were all drowned in an ocean of cares and anxieties; at last they began to feel very much and were greatly afflicted.

किं कतैल्यं गुरो बहि सर्वजस्तं महापुनि: ।

उपायो5त्त महाभाग दुःख्यायि निवृत्तचे ॥ ३ ॥

They asked with reverence their own Guru Brhaşpati, “O Guru! What are we to do now? O All knowing! You are the Great Muni; kindly say unto us if there be any means by which we can get rid of this our present crisis.”

उपचारपर नूनं वेदमन्नाः सहक्षणः ।

वार्षित्तार्थकरा नूनं सूद्रेः संलक्षिताः किल ॥ 4 ॥

There are thousands of Vedic Mantrams which yield the desired results, if they are worshipped with due rites and ceremonies and if all the rules be observed thereof.

इट्यो विधियाः प्रोक्ताः: सर्वेकामफलप्रदाः ।

ताः कुरुच युने नूनं तं जनासि च तलिकायः ॥ 5 ॥

O best of Munis! Many Yajñas are mentioned in the Vedas that yield all the desired results; you know them all; so kindly perform those Yajñas.

विधि: शरुविनाशाय यथोहिष्टः सतामे ।

तं कुरुबघाट विधियद्धया नो दुःखसंक्षयः ॥ 6 ॥

भवेदीगिरसाठैव तथा तं कतुर्महीस ।

दानवानां विनाशाय अभिवारं यथामति ॥ 7 ॥

Do all those ceremonies duly that are ordained in the Vedas for the killing of enemies; O Descendant of Śāngirasa! You ought to perform as early as possible those sacrifices for magical purposes to destroy the Dānavas so that all our miseries come to an end.

ब्रह्मसतिकाव

सर्वे मन्त्राशु वेदोक्ता दैवाधीपनताशु ते ।

न स्वतःना: सुगाधीग तथैकान्तफलप्रदा: ॥ 8 ॥

प्रभातपती asid: “O Lord of the Suras! All the mantras mentioned in the Vedas yield the desired results, but subservient to the Great Destiny only; they do not give result of themselves but do so in obedience to the laws ordained by Nature.

मन्त्राणां देवता यूयं ते तु दुःखैकभाजनम् ।

जाता: स्म कालयोगेन किं करोमि प्रसाधनम् ॥ 9 ॥

You all are the presiding Deities of the Vedic Mantras: but, now, by the strange irony of Time, you are put to difficulties and troubles; what can I do now in this case?

इन्यानिवरणातीलं वतनं यजकमैसु ।

ते यूयं विषदं प्राता: कार्च्यन्ति किमिष्य: ॥ 10 ॥

See! Indra, Agni, Varuna, and other gods are invoked in sacrifices; how, then, can sacrificial ceremonies do good when you are put to so great difficulties.

अत्यर्थपायिभावानां प्रतीकारो न विहते ।

उपायस्त्वय कर्तव्य इति शिष्यानुगासनम् ॥ 11 ॥

Therefore there is no remedy to those which will take place unavoidably; but those who are wise declare that in such cases means are to be adopted.

दैवं दैव बलवक्तिव्यवदानि नर्पिधिण: ।

उपयवादित्वे दैवं प्रवदन्ति निर्यकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Some sages say that Fate is strong but those who advocate the cause of taking remedial means say that Fate is powerless; remedies or manly exertions lead to all success.

दैवं चैवायुपायश्ध ह्रावेवाधिमती नृगाम् ।

कैवलं दैवमार्थिन्य न स्वातन्त्यं कदाचन ॥ 13 ॥

But, O King of the Devas! The embodied souls ought to resort to both Fate and Remedies; it is never advisable to depend solely on Fate.

उपायः सर्वेयं कावीं विवार्य स्थिताय पुनः ।

तस्मादुब्बीय: वः सर्वन्सिवचार्य पुनः : ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore, it is advisable to think out again and again as far as one's own intellect goes, the best remedies. O Devas! I have thought over again and again on this subject and say to you my opinion, Hear.

पुण भगवती तुहा जघान महिषासुरम् ।

युभाधिस्तु स्तुता देयी वरदानं ददावय ॥ 15 ॥

आपदं नाशिययायीसं सूत्या वा सदैव है ।

यदा यदा वो देवेश आपदो देवसभ्याः ॥ 16 ॥

In days of yore, the Bhagavatī, being appeased, killed Mahisāsura; and when you all praised and

chanted hymns to Her, She gave you this boon that She will remove all your sorrows and troubles no sooner you remember Her, and She told that you all must remember Her whenever any difficulty would arise to you out of this Great Destiny.

प्रभवित तदा कामं सर्सल्यासड़ं सुरैः सदा ।

स्मृताङ्गे नागशिष्यामि युभाकं परमापदः ॥ 17 ॥

तस्माद्विमाघले गत्वा पर्वते सुमनोहरे ।

आराधनं चण्डिकाकानः कुरूप्वे प्रेमपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

She would, then, free you all of your ocean of great difficulties. Thefore do you all now go to the highly sacred and exquisitely beautiful Himālayan mountains and worship the most worshipful Caṇḍikā Devi with your love and devotion.

मायावीजीविधानज्ञानसुख्राणे ततः ।

जानाम्बई योगवालाम्बसभा सा पधिषयिति ॥ १९ ॥

Know all the rules of the Seedmantra of Māyā and be engaged in taking Her name accompanied with burnt offerings. [ have come to know, by Yogic power, that She will be pleased with You."] I see that today your difficulties will come to an end; there is not the least doubt in this.

दुःखस्योतोष्ठ युभाके रूपशते नात्र शेभायः ।

तस्मिड्लेने सदा देवी तिःक्षौति मया भुत्तम् ॥ 20 ॥

स्तुला सम्पूक्तिता सही वांतिज्ञानीश्रव्याति ।

निद्धां घरमं कृत्वा गब्धुर्धं वे हैत्यालयम् ॥ 21 ॥

सुतः सर्वाणि कार्याणि सा दः कार्म विधाप्यति ।

I have heard that the Devi resides always in the Himācala; if you worship and praise and chant hymns to Her, She will certainly grant you your desired boons. Therefore fully decide on this thing and go the Himālayas. O Devas! She will fulfill all your desires and carry out all your intentions.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा देवतसे प्रव्युपिंगिणि || 22 ॥

हिमालयं महाराज देवीधानपरायणा ।

मायाकीजं हृदा नितयं जपन्तः सर्व एच हि || 23 ||

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus his words,

Book V Chapter XXII

the Devas departed to the Himālayas and they became all merged in the devotional worship of the Supreme Goddess and began to meditate constantly in their hearts the Seedmantra of Māyā. (Hrim.)

नमश्रकुमहायायां घबतानामभयप्रदाम् ।

गुरुधुः स्तोजमदेश्व भवत्वा ययातुः ॥ 24 ॥

They bowed down to the Goddess Mahā Māyā, the Discarder of all the fears of Her Bhaktas and began to chant hymns to Her with perfect devotion. नगे देवि विश्रेष्ठशी प्राणनाथे

सदानन्द्रके सुरानन्ददे ते ।

नगे दानवान्तप्रदे मानवानाम-

नेकाध्वे भक्तिभायमखरके ॥ 25 ॥

O Goddess! Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Lord of the Universe! the Lord of our hearts! Thou art the Everlasting Bliss and the Giver of bliss to the Devas! Salutation to Thee! Thou art the Destroyer of the Dānavas and Thou art the Giver of all desires of human beings.

न ते नामसंख्या न ते रूपमीदृक्तया

कोप्रिय वेदादिदेवादिद्वेषो ।

त्वमेवासि सर्वेषु शक्तिस्वरूपा

प्रवास्धिसंहारकानले सदैव ॥ 26 ॥

स्पतिरलं धृतिरलयं त्वमेवासि

ब्रुद्धिजीर पृष्टिषुर्धी धृति: कान्तिनशान्ती ।

सुविधा सुलुक्ष्मीर्गति: कीतिंमेधे

त्वमेवाति विश्वस्य बीजे पुराणम् ॥ 27 ॥

Thou canst be approached with devotion. Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Incarnate of all the Devas! Thy names are endless; Thy forms are endless; none can count them. Thou residest always as the Force Incarnate in all the actions, in the Creation, Preservation and Dissolution of Beings, O Goddess! Thou art the Memory, Constancy, Intelligence, Old Age. Thou art the nourishment, contentment; Thou upholdest all; Thou art the beauty, peace, good knowledge, prosperity and happiness, Thou art the Goal, fame, and intellect and Thou art the Eternal Seed unmanifested.

यदा यै: स्वक्षे: क्रोसौह कार्य

सुगणां च तेभ्यो नगामोउष शार्ये ।

भूमा योगनिर्द्रा दया त्व विश्वासा

स्विता सर्वभूतेषु शस्तैः स्वक्षे: ॥ 28 ॥

कृतं कार्यमोदी त्वया यत्सुगणां

हतोउसी महातिर्यांदोहा हयाति: ।

दया ते सदा सर्वदेवेषु दोव

प्रसिद्धा पुराणेषु वेदेषु गीता ॥ 29 ॥

We now bow down to those forms of Thine through which Thou dost serve the purpose of the Devas in this world as we are now in need of peace. Thou art forgiveness and I mecy; Thou art the Yoga Nidrā (a state between sleep and wakefulness); Thou art the kindness and Thou residest in all the beings in so many forms, great and grand, and so very celebrated; O Goddess! Thou hadst already served the cause of the gods in killing our great enemy Mahisāsura, puffed up with vanity. Therefore Thy mercy is well known amongst the gods; what more, Thy mercy is known, since very ancient times and it is narrated in the Vedas.

किम्यास्ति चित्र यद्याचा सुतं

स्वं मुदा पालयेल्योषयेसम्येगे ।

यतस्त्वं जनिजी सुगणां महापा

कुर्वैकचित्ने कायं समगम् ॥ 30 ॥

न वा ते गुणानामिघनां स्वकर्णे

वयं देवि जानीमहे विश्वबन्धो ।

कृपाणत्रमित्येव मत्वा तथा-

उसमान्पेधः स्वा पाहि पातुं समर्थ ॥ 31 ॥

What wonder is there that a mother nourishes gladly her own sons and preserves them carefully! For Thou art the Mother of the Devas; Thou art the great source of help to them; therefore dost Thou fulfill all their desires with Thine whole heart. O Devi! We do not know the limit of Thy qualities nor of Thy forms; O Goddess! Thou art worshipped by the whole Universe. Thou art fully competent to save all from dangers; we are objects of Thy pity; dost Thou save us from our present troubles!

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>विना बाणपातीलैंना पृथित्यातैविनाशूलखड्गैशिग शफित्वणे.:।</td></tr><tr><td>रिपूर्हनुभवासि शक्ता विनोदानधापीईलोकोपकाया लीला || 32 ||</td></tr><tr><td>दूरं शाशत नैव जानन्ति मृछान कार्य विना कारणं सम्पयेढ़ा ।</td></tr><tr><td>वयं तकैयामोउनुगानं प्रमाणं</td></tr><tr><td>त्यवेयासि कतोउस्य विश्वधर्य चेति || 33 ||</td></tr></table>

Thou art capable to kill enemies without shooting any arrows, without striking any blows, without hurling any trident, axes, Saktis, clubs, or any other weapons; merely by Thy mere will Thou canst kill; still for sport and for the good of all beings Thou incarnates and fightest for the sake of Lilā. The ignorant persons know such things as birth, death, etc., that this world is not eternal; that no actions can be without any cause; we, therefore, ascertain by reasoning and inference that Thou art the Supreme Cause of this whole Universe.

अत्र: सुधित्ती मुकुन्दोस्तितयं

होर नाशकृदा पुर्णो प्रसिद्धः ।

न किं त्वत्पुस्ताख्यन्ते युगादौ

त्वमेवासि सर्वस्य तैनैव माता ॥ 34 ॥

Brahmā is the Creator, Viṣṇu is the Preserver, and Maheśa is the Destroyer; so it is related in the Purāṇas. Thou again hast given birth to these three Gods in the respective cycles; therefore Thou art the Mother of all; there is no doubt in this.

विभिन्त्वं पुरातिधता देयि दत्ता

त्वया शक्तिज्ञा च तेयः समप्रा ।

त्वया संयुतासे प्रकृवीत

कार्मं जतायालनोत्यनिसंहारमेव ॥ 35 ॥

O Devi! In days of yore, these three Devas worshipped Thee; Thou wert pleased and gavest them all the best powers. Beings thus endowed with Thy powers, they have been able to create, preserve and destroy this Universe beautifully.

ते किं न मन्दयतो यतयो विमुळास्तवं

ये न विश्वजनर्गी समुपाश्यन्ति ।

विद्यां परां सकलकामफलप्रद्यां तां

मुक्तिप्रदां विबुधर्वंदुस्वंदिवांधि. || 3 6 ||

Art they not foolish, though they do Yatis (persons of self-controlled nature), who do not worship the Universal Mother, the Consciousness Incarnate, the Giver of liberation, or Whose feet are worshipped by the Devas, and worshipping Whom, one gets the fruits of all one's desires?

दे बैल्याना: यागपुराना क्षेरा

द्यभास्त एव प्रतिभाति नूनम् ।

ध्यायन्ति न त्वां कमलां च लज्जां

कान्ति स्थिति कौतिंमथापि पुहिष् ॥ 37 ॥

Certainly those Vaṣṇavas, Sauras (worshippers of the Sun) and Pāśupatas (worshippers of Śiva) are foolish braggarts who do not meditate Thee as the embodiment of Kamalā (prosperity), modesty, beauty, continuancy, Fame, nourishment.

हरित्रादिभयथ सैविता

त्वमिदं देववर्तेर्युर्तेल्या ।

भुवि भजन्ति न येडल्यिधो नरा

जननि ते विधिना खलु वर्जिताः ॥ 38 ॥

O Mother! The Ausras, Hari, Hara and other great Devas worship Thee in this world; therefore those mortals are certainly deceived by their Creator that do not worship Thee on the surface of this earth.

जलिङापादपंकजरझनं

जतुरसेन क्रांति ही: स्वयम् ।

त्रिनयनोत्रि भगधरजाधि-

पहूजपरागविद्यालयातयर: ॥ 3911

O Devi! Hari himself serves the lotus feet of Lakṣmī by colouring them (toes and other fingers of the feet) red with lac juice; Hara is very anxious to serve the lotus feet and take the dust thereof of Pārvatī; Lakṣmī and Pārvatī are but Thy part manifestations; therefore to serve them is, in other words to serve Thee.

किमपरस्य नरस्य कवानकैस्तव

पदान्वयुगं न वर्जान्ति के ।

विपततगगगृहाशं द्वां क्षमां

कृताधिया मुनवोर्धि भवन्ति ते ॥ 40 ॥

What to speak of other persons, even those who

Book V Chapter XXII

can discriminate between real and unreal and those who have left their worldly homes and have become dispassionate towards worldly objects, even those Munis worship forgiveness and mercy, that are but Thy parts; therefore who is there in this world that does not serve Thy lotus-feet!

दैव त्वद्धिभवने न जना रता

ये संसारकुपपतिताः पतिताः किलामी ।

ते कुशुस्पलिश्राअधितुयात भवन्ति

दारिद्वदै-यसहिता रहिताः सुखौधेः ॥ 41 ॥

O Devi! Those human begins plunge into the dreadful wells of this Samsāra, the round of birth and death, and are deprived of all pleasures, who do not serve Thy lotus feet. What more can be said than the fact that those fallen beings suffer terribly from poverty, humility, leprosy, headache, and the chronic enlargement of spleen.

वे काषभारहने यवसावहारे

कार्य भवन्ति निपुणा धनवहारीनाः ।

जानीमहुंल्यमतिभभिवर्तीयसेवा

पूर्वे भवे जननि तैनं कृता कदारुषि ॥ 4 2 ॥

O Mother! Those persons are void of any wealth and wife; they are the carriers of loads of wood and collect grass and leaves and show their skill in such acts; they are of little understanding and never they served in their previous births Thy lotus-feet. This we have to know very well within our heart of hearts.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैः सर्वैरिक्वा करणार्विता ।

प्रावृद्धिपूव तससा रूपयीवनसर्वुता ॥43 ॥

Vyāsa said: "O King! When all the Devas thus eulogised, instantly the Devi Ambikā, full of youth and beauty appeared there out of mercy.

दिव्यांवराय तेवी दिव्यभूषणभूषिता ।

दिव्यमाल्यसमायुक्ता दिव्यचन्दनचरिता ॥ 44 ॥

जगनोहनतावणया सर्वतक्षणालक्षिता ।

अहितीयवरूपा सा देवानां दर्शनं नता ॥ 45 ॥

जाछ्वयं नतुकामा सा निर्णता निरिश्याद्रात् ।

दिव्यरूपधरा देवी विश्यमोहनमोहनी ॥ 46 ॥

That extraordinary beautiful Bhagavatī, endowed with all auspicious signs, and adorned with the Divine clothing, ornaments, and garlands and sandal paste, etc., appeared before the Devas. Before Whom, even the world enchanter Cupid bows down; with such beautiful, Divine appearance, the Devi emerged from the mountain cave in order to take Her ablutions in the Ganges.

देवान्मृतीपरानाह मेघगम्भीर्या शिरा ।

प्रेमपूर्व सिमतं कृत्वा कोक्रिकलमंजुबातिवि ॥ 47 ॥

That Devi, sweet-voiced like a cuckoo, gladly smiling began to say to the Devas, singing hymns to Her, in a voice deep like that of a rumbling cloud.

देव्यवाच

भो भो: सुवरा: काऊ भविद्धः सुगते भूणम् ।

किमर्थ बूत वः कार्य चिंताविष्ठा: कुतः पुनः ॥ 48 ॥

The Devi said: O Best of Suras! Whom are you praising constantly in this place? What do you want? Why are you so anxious and seem to be so much careworn? Do please tell all this to Me in detail.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला भाषितं तस्य मोहिता रूपसम्पदा ।

प्रेमपूर्व हदुल्साहास्तमचुः सुस्सत्तमः ॥ ४९ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas were first enchanted by Her beauty and softness; then, being encouraged by Her sweet words, began to speak with great joy.

देश ऊचुः

देवि सुमस्त्वां विश्रेष्ठि प्रणातःस कृपाणवे ।

पाहि नः सर्वदुःखेष्यः संविन्यान्दैत्यातपितान् ॥ 50 ॥

पुरा त्वया महोद्वी निर्हत्यासुरकेटकम् ।

महिषं नो वरो दन्तः स्मर्तैम्बाई सदापदि ॥ 51 ॥

O Devi! We pray to Thee, O Lord of this Universe! We bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Protect us from all the troubles; we are very much care-worn and tormented by the Daityas. O Great Goddess! In ancient times

Thou didst kill Mahisāsura, the source of troubles to all and then told us to remember Thee whenever any difficultly would arise.

सरगाहैत्वर्जा पौढ़ा नागाधिष्णायमंशगयम् ।

तेन त्वं संस्मृता देवि नृनमस्मामित्रियपि ॥ 5 2 ॥

Then Thou wouldst undoubtedly remove all the troubles arising from the Daityas no sooner we remember Thee. O Devi! We have now remembered Thee for that very reason.

अध: शुभ्भिशुभ्भी द्वावसुरी चोरदर्शनी ।

द्वभजी विनकर्तारिहन-यी पुर्षेः किल ।। 5 3 ।।

At present the two dreadful Asuras Sumbha and Niśumbha have sprung up and are creating great disturbances; and they cannot be killed by any male beings.

रक्तबीजघ्छ बलवांघंडमुपईी तथाज़मृती ।

पूर्तेपट्रीघ देवानां हृत राजयं महावलरेः ॥ 54 ॥

The powerful Raktabrija and Caṇḍa Mūnda and other Asuras united have dispossessed the Devas of their Heavens. Thou alone art our goal and refuge; without Thee there is none other to save us.

गतिरात्य न चास्मार्कं त्वमेवास महावले ।

कुरु कार्य सुराणां वे दुःस्तितानां सुमध्यमे ॥ 55 ॥

Therefore, O Beautiful One! Thou dost do this work for the Devas who are extremely troubled and distressed.

देवास्त्वद्धिष्णजेन निरातः सदैव

ते दानवैरित्वलैर्विषयं सुनिताः ।

तां देवि दु:खराहितां कुक भक्तिपुक्तां

मातत्स्वेव सरणं भव दु:खितानाम् ॥ 56 ॥

O Powerful Devi! The Devas are always at the services of Thy lotus feet; still the very powerful Dānavas are throwing them into dangers; O Mother! Thou art the Preserver of the distressed; therefore dost Thou preserve the Devas, devoted to Thee.

सकलपुवनरशा देवे कावां लवासा प्र

स्वकृतमिति विदित्वा विश्यमेततुयातो ।

जननि जगति पीडां दानवा दपयुक्ता:

स्वकलमदस्मितासे प्रकुर्बनित मातः ॥ 57 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पश्रमकल्भे

द्वाविंशो3थायः ॥ 22 ॥

O Mother! The Dānavas, being very much emboldened by their powers, are creating many havocs on the surface of the Earth; now remembering that, in the beginning of the Yugas, Thou didst create all this Universe, Thou dost now ought to protect all this Universe."

Here ends the Twenty second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the eulogising of the Devi by the Devas in

Śrimaddevībhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevibbāgavatam

CHAPTER XXIII

On the Prowess of Kauśiki

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुतृता तदा देखी दैवहैः: शुज्ञात्रिकेः ।

स्वर्गरीतरवं रूपं प्रापुर्युं चकार है ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, the Devi created from Her body another supremely beautiful form.

पार्वेत्यस्तु शरीराई नि:सृता चाधिका तदा ।

कौशिकीति समतेषु ततो कोकेषु पढ़ते ॥ 2 ॥

This created form, the Ambikā Devi, became

known in all the worlds as Kauśiki, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devi Pārvatī.

निद्यातां तु तस्यां सा पार्वीनी तनुव्यतयात् ।

कृष्णकाप्रध सुस्तात कालिका सा प्रकर्षितिं ॥ ३ ॥

मर्षीवाणं महाधोरा दैत्यानां भयवर्धिनी ।

कालराजीति सा प्रोक्ता सर्वकामफलप्रदा ॥ 4 ॥

When Kauśiki was created out of the body of Pārvatī, the Pārvatī's body became transformed and turned out into a black colour and became

Book V Chapter XXIII

known as Kālīkā. Her terrible black appearance, when beheld, increases the terror even of the Daityas.

अधिकाया: परे हर्षे विरराज मनोहरम् ।

सर्वभूषणसैभुक्ते लावणवगुणसंगुवन् ॥ 5 ॥

O King! This Devi is now become known in this world as Kālarātri, the night of destruction, at the end of the world, identified with Durgā, the Fulfiller of all the desires.

ततोप्रविका तदा देवान्तिवल्याच हु सस्मिता ।

निहन्तु निर्भया युयं हनियाथि सिपूनि ॥ 6 ॥

The Ambikā Devi, then, began to look splendid, decked with various ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look very lovely. The Devi Ambikā then smiled a little and said, “Better be fearless; I will slay just now your enemies.

कार्य वः सर्वेथा कार्य सिद्धिर्याम्यर्थे रो ।

निरुभादी-विध्यामि युयाकं सुखहतेते ॥ 7 ॥

It is My incumbent duty to carry out your purposes; I will therefore slay in battle Nisumbha and others for the sake of your happiness."

इत्युक्त्वा सा तदा देवो सिंहारूका मदोल्कटा ।

कालिकां पार्थत: कृत्वा जगाम नगरे रिपोः ॥ 8 ॥

Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavatī, elated with pride, mounted on lion and, taking Kālākā with Her, entered into the city of Sumbha, the enemy of the gods.

सा गतोपयने तस्थाविक्यका कालिकावित्य।

जगावय कलं तत्र जगन्मोहनमोहनम् ॥ 9 ॥

Ambikā went to a garden adjoining the city accompanied Kālākā, and began to sing in such a sweet melodious tune that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates the whole world.

भुत्वा तन्यभूरं गानो महोर्षीयुः खगा मृगाः ।

मूदं च परमामापुरमरा गाने स्थिताः ॥ १० ॥

What more can be said than the fact that, hearing that sweet melodious song, the birds and beasts became enchanted; the Devas then began to feel much pleasure from the sky.

तस्मिवसरे तत्र दानवो शूभ्मसेवकी ।

चण्डपुण्डाधिषी धौते रमागणी यदच्छया ॥ 1 1 ॥

आगती ददुपगते तु तौ तदा दिव्यस्विणीम् ।

अधिकां गानसेवुक्तां कालिकां पुतः चित्ताम् ॥ 12 ॥

In the meanwhile Canda, Munga the two dreadful Asuras, and attendants of Śumbha, came out accidentally there on their sportive excursions and saw the beautiful Ambikā Deviś singing and Kālika Deviś sitting before Her.

दृष्टा तां दिव्यल्पां च दानवी दिव्यमात्रिति ।

जमतुस्तरासा पार्शं शुपम्यय नृपस्तम ॥ 13 ॥

O best of Kings! No sooner Gandā, Munḍa saw the extraordinary beauty of the Goddess Bhagavati, than they went at once to Śumbha.

तौ गत्वा तं समासीनं दैत्यानामधिर्य गृहे ।

कंचतुर्मंडुरां वाणीं प्रणाय शिरसा नृपम् ॥ १४ ॥

राजन्हिमालयात्कामं कामिनी काममोहित्री ।

सम्याता सिंहमारूढा सर्वतैक्षणपर्वेतुा ॥ १ ५ ॥

On approaching towards the lord of the Daityas sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus in a sweet voice:—“O King! Here has come from the Himalayas a woman accidentally, mounted on a lion; Her limbs are, shining with all good signs so much so that even the God of love would be enchanted by Her sight.

नैदुपी देवलोकेंर्जित न नायवंदुपे तथा ।

न दृष्टा न सुता कवापि पुविष्यां प्रपदोत्तमा ॥ 16 ॥

Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandharva Lokas or in this earth can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor heard about such a lady before.

गानं च तादृषी राजकानेति जनराजूनम् ।

भूगपित्रहान्त तत्थर्षं मनुप्रत्यवगोहिताः ॥ 17 ॥

O King! That lady is singing so beautifully and pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing motionless by Her side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice.

ज्ञायतों कस्य पुत्रीयं क्रियांमिह चागत ।

गृह्धतां राजशादूल तव योग्यास्ति कामिनि ॥ 18 ॥

O King! That Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter is this lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her.

ज्ञाला नय गृहे भार्यों कुक कल्याणलोचनाम् ।

निश्रिंत नानि संसोने नारी लेवेंबिधा कित १ १९ १ १

Know this as certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in this world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her.

देवानां सर्वेल्पानि गृहीतानि त्वया यून ।

कमाओमां वरातोहां प्रगृहासि नृपोत्तम ॥ 20 ॥

O Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the Devas; why not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady?

इन्स्ट्रीरातः श्रीमान्यारिजाततक्रस्तथा ।

गृहीतेशः सचमुखास्वया नृप बलातिकल ॥ 21 ॥

O King! You have taken by force the exquisitely beautiful Airāvata elephant of Indra, the Parijāta Tree, the seven faced horse Ucaisāravā, and many other jewels.

विभानं वैधसं दिव्यं माललध्वजसंयुतम् ।

त्वासा उरं तलमृतं तढ़नेन युच चाढ़तम् ॥ 22 ॥

You have acquired by your might the Prince of Jewels, the celestial car of the Creator Brahmā, ensigned by the emblematic Swan.

कुबेरस्य निधि: पचास्वया राजनस्माहतः ।

छंज जलपते: शुभं गृहीति तत्त्वया बलात् ॥ 23 ॥

You have dispossessed Kubera of his treasure of the value of a Padma (one thousand billion) and Varuna, the God of oceans, of his white umbrella.

पाश्राशि निरुभ्यमेन भात्रा तव नृपोतम ।

गृहीतोस्ति हटाकामां वर्णायण जितवच च ॥ 24 ॥

O King! When Varuna was defeated, your brother Niśumbha took perforce his Pāśa weapon.

अलानपत्रज्ञां तृभ्ये मालां जलनिधिद्वैति ।

भयातव महाराज रन्तानि विवधातिन च ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The Great Ocean gave you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured you by presenting a garland of lotuses which never fade away.

मृत्यो: शक्तिर्यमस्यायि एण्डः परमदात्णः ।

त्वया जिल्वा हूतः कामं जिकमव्युदयोंते नृप ॥ 26 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that you have conquered the Death and took away His force and that you have easily conquered Yama, the God of Death and have taken from Him His horrible staff.

कामधेत्रगृहीतास इतंते सागतेढ़वा ।

मेनकाशा बेरो गरसंतल शिक्छित चाधसः ॥ 27 ॥

O King! You have brought that Heavenly cow which came out when then ocean churned; that cow is still with you; what more to say than that Menakā and other Apsarās are under your control. एवं सर्वांशि रन्तानि तवास3न्तानि बतावपि ।

कम्यान गृहाते कान्तारनमेधा वराङून ॥ 28 ॥

Thus you have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you not taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels, amongst women.

सर्वाणि ते गृहस्याति रन्तानि विश्वादाय ।

अनरया सभविध्यन्ति रत्नभूताति भूपते ॥ 29 ॥

O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their real purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with this queen of jewels—this Lady.

विषु लोकेषु दैवेन्ये नेपूर्णी वर्तेते प्रिया ।

तस्मातामानयाण्ये लं कुक भार्यों मनोहारणे ॥ 30 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and accept Her as your wife.

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुता त्योबांक्यं मयुं मयुग्राकरण ।

प्रसत्रवदनः ग्राह सुत्रीयं सरिष्ये सरिष्ये। ३ १ १

गच्छ सुग्रीव दृतत्वं कुक कार्य विश्वक्षण ।

वक्तव्यं च तथा तन ययावंधेति कुशोदरी ॥ ३ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of Caṇḍa and Munḍa, Śumbha spoke gladly to Sugrīva who was close by: “Go, Sugrīva, do my messenger’s work; you are well skilled in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist may come over to me.

Book V Chapter XXIII

उपायौ द्वी प्रयोक्त्यौ कान्तासु सुविचक्षणैः ।

सामदाने इति प्रपुः श्रुत्रसस्कोविदः ॥ ३३ ॥

Those who are well versed in the science of amorous love declare that only two methods are to be adopted by the clever persons towards the female sex: (1) conciliation and gentle words and (2) gifts and presents.

घेरे प्रयुस्थमानेउनि रसाधासस्तु जायते ।

निऋई रसभूँः: स्यातस्मातौ दृषिती बुढ़ेः ॥ 34 ॥

For if the policy of division or sowing dissensions be applied then hypocrisy is shown and that means the improper manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if chastisement be applied then the love sentiment becomes interrupted.

सामदानमुखैवार्वसैः: रतक्षौर्भैर्मधुतेलथा ।

का न याति वशे दूत कामिनी कामपीढिता ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, the wise have condemned these as corrupt means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who does not come round excited with passion when good and sweet words are spoken to her in accordance with the Sāma and Dāna methods?

व्यास उवाच

सुगीवस्तु वचः श्रुत्वा रुष्णोर्फं कष्टिपयं पटु ।

जगाम तसा तव यमासे जगद्विक्का ॥ ३६ ॥

सोप्रथम्युपुर्षी कानां तिंहस्योपर सैंस्थिता ।

प्रणाय मधुरं वाक्यमुवाच जगद्विक्काम् ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: Sugriva, hearing the nice skilled words of Śumbha went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the Universe. He saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and spoke gently and sweetly as follows:

दूत उवाच

चरेकि चिद्गशारितः शुभ्मः सर्वानुसुन्दरः ।

त्रैतोक्याधिपतेः शूरः सर्वेचिज्ञजते सूचः ॥ 38 ॥

The messenger said: “O Beautiful One! Śumbha, the enemy of the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the ruler of the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all.

तेनताई प्रेषितः कामं त्वत्सकार्ण महात्मना ।

त्वदुपश्वजपासक्तिश्चेनातिविद्युक्ता ॥ 39 ॥

Hearing your beauty and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much attached to you and has become so very passionate that he has sent me to you to express his views.

वचनं तस्य तत्विक्रं श्युणु प्रेमपुर:सर्मः प्राणपत्य यथा प्राह दैत्यानामधिपत्यत्विय ॥ 40 ॥ देवा मया वित्तः सर्वे तैलोक्याधिपतित्वसहम् ।

यजभागगाहं काने गृह्मागीह स्थितः सदा ॥ 41 ॥

O One of delicate limbs! Please hear what that Lord of the Daityas has spoken Thee, after duly saluting to Thee, words full of love and affection towards Thee: O Beloved! I have defeated all the Devas and have thus become the Lord of the three worlds; specially I partake of all the offerings made in sacrificial acts and ceremonies, without moving away from my house.

हतसारा कृता नूनं दीर्भेय स्तवर्जिता ।

यासि स्तानि देवानां तानि चाह्तवानकम् ॥ 42 ॥

I have taken away all the gems, jewels and wealth that belonged to the Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods has become now worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried away.

भोक्ताङ्गं सर्वत्नानां विषु लोकेषु याभिनि ।

वशानुगाः सुरा: सर्वे मम देत्याक्षं मानवाः ॥ 43 ॥

O Fair One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the Trilokas; so much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are passing away their times, subservient to Me.

त्वदुगुणै: कर्णमागव प्रविष्य हृदयांतम् ।

त्वद्धीनः कृतः कामे किंकरींस्म क्रोम किम् ॥ 44 ॥

त्वमाजायय रभोते तक्ररोमि वशानुगः ।

दासोड़हं तव चार्वीग रक्ष मां कामबाणत: ॥ 45 ॥

But no sooner Thy qualifications reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and hast made me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am now Thy servant; so Thou ought'st to save me

from the darts of passions. O One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your captive.

भज मो तंच मरालाशि तवाधीने स्मारुकलम् ।

शैलोक्यसामिनी भूत्वा भूंकुव भोगानुतनाम्। 4 6 11

Specially I am extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; therefore dost Thou serve me when Thou wilt be made the Lord of the three worlds and thus enjoy the incomparably excellent things.

तव चात्राकर: कान्ते भवामि मरणाविधि ।

अवधोर्धासि वरारोहे सदैवातुर्मानुषैः ॥ 47 ॥

सदा सीयायसंयुक्ता भविष्यसि वरानने ।

O Beloved! I will remain ever Thy obedient servant up to the last moment of death. O Excellent One! I cannot ever be killed by the Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair faced One! Thou wilt be always prosperous and fortunate.

घन ते रमते चित्त तज क्रीडव्य सुन्दरि ॥ 48 ॥

इति तस्य वर्धिश्रते विमुघय मदमन्त्ये ।

वत्क्यं यद्वदेवीपणा तदूब्किं हमूयं चक्न : ॥ 49 ॥

गृष्भाय चंचलापाक्षि तदुब्बीभ्यमारु वै ।

Thou wilt be able to sport anywhere Thou likest. O Devi! Please ponder over words of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out Thy views gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I will go immediately to Śumbha and inform him about Thy mind.

व्यास उवाच

तदुद्वावचनं शुत्वा मित्तं कृत्वा सुप्रेणलम् ॥ 50 ॥

तं प्रह मभुतं वाचं देवी देवायंसाधिका ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devī, ready to serve the cause of the Gods, heard the messenger's gentle words and replied smiling and sweetly.

शीटेख्याच

जानाम्बई निषुर्णभं च गुर्णभं चातिवलं नृपम् ॥ 51 ॥

जेतारं सर्वदैवानां हेतांरं चैव विविधाम।

Śrī Devi spoke: I know fully well Śumbha and Niśumbha; the King Śumbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, and the destroyer of enemies.

राशिं सर्वगुणानां च भोक्तारं सर्वसंयदाम् ॥ 52 ॥

दातारं चातिरुगरं च सुन्दं मन्याकृतिन् ।

He is the repository of all good qualities, the enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is beautiful, in fact a second Cupid.

ब्रात्रिंशलक्षणीयुक्तमवध्ये सुरामानुषे: ॥ 53 ॥

ज्ञाना समागतान्यमय उद्धकामा महामुगम् ।

He is adorned with thirty-two auspicious signs; particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the Devas or human beings.

रत्नं कतनकायाति स्वर्णोपाधिकवुद्धे ॥ 54 ॥

तजाई स्वपति उहुं दूरादेवागतास्थि से ।

O Messenger! Knowing this I have come here to have a look of that great warrior Sumbha. The jewel comes in contact with gold to increase its lustre; so I have come here from afar to see my husband.

दृष्टा मया सुरा: सर्वे मानवा भृति मनादः ॥ 55 ॥

गन्धर्वां राक्षसाश्रान्ये ये चातिभिर्यदर्शनाः ।

सर्वे रुंभभयाद्धोता वेपमाना विचेतसः ॥ 56 ॥

श्रूला शुभगुणानत्र प्रणातस्यवद विद्वस्या ।

On seeing all the Devas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas and the eminent beautiful persons on the earth I have come to know that they are all terror stricken and almost unconscious and shudder at the name of Śumbha. So, on hearing about his abilities, I have now come here to see him.

गच्छ दूत महाभाग कृष्टि शुभ्यं महावलम् ॥ 57 ॥

निर्जीने शल्याग्या वाचा वचनं चवनान्माम ।

त्वां सात्वा बलितां श्रेष्ठ सुवर्णाणं च सुवर्ण ॥ 58 ॥

दातारं गृणेन गृहं सर्वविद्याशिरापदम् ।

जेतारं सर्वदेवानां दक्षे चोरं कुलोतनम् ॥ 59 ॥

भोक्तां सर्वलतानां स्वाधीनं स्वखलोजतम् ।

पतिकामान्यस्मदं सत्यं तव योग्य नाराधि ॥ 60 ॥

O Messenger! O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero Sumbha and speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine: "That you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the beautiful, skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified, charitable, clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and conqueror

Book V Chapter XXIV

of the Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you are so much exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels.

स्वेच्छया नगरे तेउत्र समायाता महामते ।

मागसित कारणं किंचिविहावोर हास्पोसेन्म १ ६ १ ॥

Therefore, O King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my own accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband.

बालभपावदृतं किंडिकृतृतं राजन्मय पुरा ।

क्रीडांत्वा च व्यस्यथापि: सहैकाते वदुच्छया ॥ 62 ॥

स्वदेहबलदर्पेण सखीनीं पुरतो रहः ।

मत्समानक्षल: गुरो रणे मां जेच्यति सुकुद्य ॥ 63 ॥

तं विराधार्यहं कर्मां जात्वा तस्य बताबलम् ।

O High! souled One I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! There is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days while I was playing with My comrades, I promised before them privately partly out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily strength that I will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me and who will defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and weaknesses.

जहसुवंचन शुला सख्यो विमितमानसा: ॥ 64 ॥

किमेता कृतं कृरं त्रामदूतमागुं वै ।

My comrades laughed at my words and spoke with wonder “Why has this girl made such an extraordinarily difficult promise?”

तस्माचमपि राजेन्द्र जाला मे हीदुर्ग कलम् ॥ 65 ॥

बिला मां खवलेनावा वार्छितं कुरु घानतः ।

त्वं वा ततानुजो घाता समेल्य स्मरांगणे ।

बिला मां समेरणात्र विवाहं कुक सु-दर ॥ 66 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवतं महापुराणे घबमकन्भे

यजीवीगोर्यायाः ॥ 23 ॥

Therefore, O Monarch! Better marry Me and fulfil My desires after knowing My strength and defeating Me in a battle. O Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or your younger Niśumbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating Me in the battle field.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess of Kauśiki in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXIV

CHAPTER XXIV

On Dhūmralocana

व्यास उवाच

देल्यासद्धचनं श्रुत्वा से दृतः प्राह विविसतः ।

किं बूढ़े रुचिरणाष्ट्र क्षीस्वभावाद्धि साहास्ता ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger was thunderstruck with Devi's words and said: "O Beautiful Lady! What art Thou speaking? It seems that Thou dost no think on this matter, owing to Thy feminine nature.

इन्हादा चिर्षिता येन देवा दैत्यलाशअउपरे ।

तं कयं समरे देँवे जेतुनिष्छ्वसि पाधिनी ॥ २ ॥

O Devi! Thou art boasting in vain; how canst Thou expect to conquer Śumbha in a battle when he was conquered Indra and other Devas and many other Dānavas?

त्रैतोक्ये तात्पूर्णो नासित यः शुर्णं समरे जयेत् ।

का तवं कमलपत्रासित तस्यागो युधि संग्रतम् ॥ ३ ॥

O Lotus-eyed One! There is no hero in the three worlds that can conquer Sumbha in battle; Thou seemest to be a mere trifle before that King of Demons in a face-to-face fight.

अविरवार्य न चत्कयं चत्वयं क्वाणि सून्दरि ।

बलं स्वपर्योजिता चत्क्यं समयोत्रितम् ॥ 4 ॥

O Fair One! Nowhere ought to be said any words without being thought over; one must weight the one's own and other's might and then speak accordingly.

त्रैतौक्यापित्रितः शृष्यस्तव रूपेण गोहितः ।

त्वां च प्रार्थयेत राजा कुक्र तस्येशितं प्रिये ॥ 5 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The King Šumbha, the Lord of the three worlds, enchanted by Thy fascinating beauty, is desirous of Thee; therefore dost Thou fulfill his desires and become his beloved wife.

स्वक्तम मुर्षस्वभारे लं समान्य वचनं मम ।

भज सुभ्यं निर्युभ्यं वा हितमेतद् ब्बीपि ते ॥ 6 ॥

Thou better now abandonest Thy illiterate nature and worshippest Šumbha or Niśumbha; I am speaking for Thy good; so keep my words.

शूज्ञ: सर्वेथा सर्वैं: प्राणिधिः: परथा मुदा ।

सेवनीयो बुद्धिमद्धिन्नानामुनीभे ससः ॥ ७ ॥

The amorous love sentiment is the best of nine prevailing sentiments. Therefore every intelligent being ought to cherish with gladness this amorous feeling.

नागमिष्यसि चेद्राले संकूद्रः पृथिवीपति: ।

अन्यान्ताकान्योथ वलाज्येथिति साम्यान् ॥ ८ ॥

And if Thou, O Weak girl! dost not go to Sumbha, then that Lord of the Earth will become very angry and will order his servants to take Thee perforce before him.

कैशोलाकृष्य ते नूनं दानवा बलदायिताः ।

त्वां निय्थिति वामोक ततसा शुंभसब्धिधी ॥ 9 ॥

O Fair One! Those proud Demons will carry Thee by holding Thy hair before Šumbha; there is no doubt in this.

स्वतलजां रक्ष तत्वंभी साहसं सर्वेथा त्यज ।

मातिता गच्छ ततार्थे मानपात्र यंतोत्रि वे ॥ १० ॥

O thin bodied One! Bener forego Thy boldness in every way and keep Thy self-respect. Thou art the object of respect and admiration and so should go before him.

वव युद्धे निशितेबीण: वव सुखं तिलसृजम् ।

सारासारं परिच्छेध कुक मे वचनं पटु ॥ १ १ ॥

भवं शुभ्यं निषुभयं वा लब्धाजिस परमं शुभम् ।

What difference is there between the fight which makes one's body liable to cuts and wounds by sharp arrows and pleasures that arise out of sexual intercourse! These are like the two opposite poles; therefore judge what is useless and what is

useful and keep my good advice. Thou shalt be exceedingly happy if Thou servest Šumbha or Niśumbha.

देव्यवाच

सत्यं दूत महाभाग प्रवक्तुं निपुणो हासि ॥ १२ ॥

निशुभ्यभूषी जानाभि बलर्वेनीविति धुवम् ।

प्रतिजा मे कृता बाल्याद्यथा सा कर्व भवेत् ॥ १३ ॥

The Devi spoke: 'O Messenger! You are fortunate; you are well trained to speak out truth; I know full well that Śumbha and Niśumbha are strong. Still out of my childish nature, the promise that I made before I cannot undo it.

तस्मादुहि निष्यूभं च गुभ्यं वा बलवततम् ।

विता युद्धं न ने भर्ता भविता कोउपि सीघडान् ॥ 14 ॥

Therefore speak to the powerful Śumbha or Niśambha that none can be my husband simply from his beauty. Without defeating Me in battle no one marry Me.

वित्ता में तरस का कंर रंगहुतु सामघत् ।

युढ़ेच्छया समावातां विद्धि माबलतं चूर ॥ 15 ॥

So conquer Me soon and marry Me as you like. Though of a weaker sex, I have come here to fight; know this as certain.

युढ़ं दैहि समर्थोस सीतभर्म समाचर ।

विशेषि मम गुताव्येन्यातालं भवळ माधिसम् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore if you be capable, fight and do the duty of a warrior. And if you be terrified by seeing my trident or if you want your life, quit the Heavens and this earth and go down to Pātāla without any delay.

विदिवं च धरा त्यक्वा जीवितेच्छा यद्यति ते

इति दूत बदलु चं नाला स्वपतिमादगत् ॥ 17 ॥

O Messenger! Go just now to your master and tell him sweetly these words. Then that powerful Lord of the Dānavas will judge what ought to be done.

स विचार्यं यथा युक्तं कार्त्थिति महावलः ।

संसारे दूतधार्मोंयं यत्सत्यं भाषणं किल ॥ 18 ॥

ज्ञाने पर्यो च धर्मत्र तथा लं कुम भ चित्रम् ।

O Knower of Dharma! To speak out truth before

Book V Chapter XXIV

an enemy, before one's own master is certainly the duty of a messenger in this world; therefore go quickly and tell him what are verily true.

व्यास उचाच

अथ तद्वचनं शुत्वा नीतिमढ़तसंयुतम् ॥ 19 ॥

हैतुयुक्त प्राणचं च चित्मितः प्रययी ततं ।

गत्वा दैत्यपर्ति तृता चिवाएं च पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

प्राणय पादयोः प्रद्धः प्रत्युवाच नृचं च तम् ।

राजनीतिमयं वाक्यं यदुपूर्वि प्रियं वचः ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The messenger was quite surprised to hear the bold words, though full of reason and morals, of the Devi, puffed up by the vanity of Her strength and departed. Coming to the Lord of Daityas, the messenger bowed down before his feet and told him sweet words, full of morals, in a very humble way after pondering over and over again what he would say.

दूत उवाच

सत्यं प्रियं च चल्यं तेन चित्तायरो हहाम ।

सत्यं प्रियं च राजेन्द्र चवनं दुर्वर्भ किल ।। 22 ॥

The messenger said: O King! Words, true and the same time sweet, ought to be spoken before one's master; but these are very rare in this world.

अधियं वदतां कामां राजा कुयतेति सर्वथा ।

सायात्कृत: समायाता कस्य वा किंकलाजवलि ॥ 23 ॥

On the other hand, if unpleasant words be spoken, the King gets very angry. So I am very anxious now. O King! Whether that lady is weak or strong, whence has She come, whose wife is She, I have not been able to ascertain all these.

न ज्ञानोगेचं किंचितिकं बलीमि विचेहितम् ।

युद्धकामा मया द्वा गर्यिता कटुपभाषिणी ॥ 24 ॥

How then can I say about Her conduct? But, on seeing that harsh speaking woman, I have come to understand this much that She is exceedingly haughty and has come to fight.

तया यत्कक्षितं स्यन्तकृष्णुव महामते ।

मया वाल्यास्त्रितियं कृता पूर्वं विज्ञोदतः ॥ 25 ॥

O King! You are very intelligent; therefore

judge what ought to be done after hearing only what that lady has told me to speak to you.

सखौनीं पुत्तः काम विद हं प्रति सर्वथा ।

यो मां युद्धे जयेद्धा दर्षे च विधुँतीते में ॥ 26 ॥

तं वरीचायम्हे कामां पर्तिं समवलं किल ।

न मे प्रतिज्ञा मिथ्या सा कर्तेल्या तृपसत्ति ॥ 27 ॥

That Lady said: “In days of childhood, while I was playing, out of my childish nature, I promised before my comrades that I would marry that valiant warrior who would defeat me thoroughly in a battle and thus curb My pride. O best of kings! You are religious; so you ought to make My word turn out false.

तस्याद्धूब्द्वास धर्मत्र जित्वा मां स्ववर्गं कृतः ।

तथेति व्याह्त्रत वाक्यं श्रुलाउंहं सपुपगततः ॥ 28 ॥

Bring Me under your control by defeating Me in a battle." O King! Hearing these words I have returned; now do whatever you like.

यथेच्छसि महाराज तथा कुक्र तव प्रियम् ।

सा युद्धर्व कृतमति: सायुधा सिंहगामिनि ॥ 29 ॥

निश्छला वर्तेत पूय यद्योग्यं तद्धिपयातम् ।

That Lady is determined to fight and is waiting there, firmly mounted on a lion, and with various weapons in Her hands. Now judge and do what is best.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकपयं चचनस्तस्य सुप्रीयस्य नाराधिः ॥ 30 ॥

पूषच्छ घातरं शूरं समीपस्यं महावलम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the words of Sugrīva, the king Śumbha asked his hero brother Nísumbha who was close by.

गृभ्र उवाच

घातः किमत्र कर्तेल्यं बृहि सत्यं महामते ॥ 31 ॥

नार्यका योदयुकामापत्स समाढ्यवित समानुम् ।

अहं गच्छामि संग्रामे लं वा गच्छ बलान्धितः ॥ 32 ॥

यद्रोचते निर्गुभाधु तत्कर्तेनंच मया किल ।

O Brother! You are intelligent; speak out truly what ought to be done now? The lovely woman is challenging us to fight. Shall I go to fight or you would go with forces? I will do whatever you say.

<table><tr><td>निरुभूम उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>न मया न त्वया वीर गतन्ध्यं रणामूर्पिति ॥ 3 3 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>प्रेयमव्म महागरा त्वितं धूपलोचनम् ।</td></tr><tr><td>स गत्वा तां रोय चित्वा गृहीत्वा चारक्लोतवाग्य ॥ 3 4 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>आगमिष्यति शुभ्योउत्र विवाह: संविद्यितात् ।</td></tr><tr><td>Nisūmbha said: O King! It is not proper that you or I would go to the battle field. Better send Dhūnralocana to the field quickly. Let that hero go there and defeat that beautiful Lady and bring Her here. You can then marry Her.</td></tr></table>

व्यास उवाच

<table><tr><td>तिश्रिया वचस्तस्य शुष्पो धातुः कनीयसः ॥ 35 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>कोपातसंप्रयवामास पार्थस्यं धूप्तोचनम् ।</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus his younger brother's words, Śumbhā filled with anger, instantly sent Dhūmralocana who was close by to battle.

शृष्म उवाच

<table><tr><td>धूपतोचन गछासु सैन्येन महता3प्रत्: ॥ 36 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>गृहीतास3नय तां मुर्धा स्ववीयंमदोहिताम्।</td></tr><tr><td>देवे वा दानवो वाउपि मनुष्यो वा महावल: ॥ 37 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>तत्याधिण्रातां प्राप्तो हेत्व्यतस्ता तथा ।</td></tr></table>

Śumbha said: “O Dhuñmalocana! Take a vast army and go at once to the battle-field and bring that stupid Lady, vainly boasting of Her strength. If any Deva, Dānava or any other powerful human being take Her side, kill him instantly.

तत्यार्थवर्तिनी काली हवा संगुहा तां पुन: ॥ 38 ॥

गीधमत्र समागच्छ कृत्वा कार्यमन्तुजम् ।

स्थपीया त्वया साखी मुंडतीं घुद्यागरणा ॥ 39 ॥

Slay Her companion the Goddess Kālī and bring Her too. Do all these responsible duties and return quickly. That Chaste Lady is to be protected by all means. The body of that thin Lady is very delicate; so shoot arrows at Her very carefully and see that they are not sharp.

यत्नेन महता वीर यदुदेहा कृणोदरी ।

तत्सहायश्छ हत्वय ये एंग राश्वाणयाः ॥ 40 ॥

सर्वथा सा न हन्तव्या रक्षणीया प्रयन्ततः ।

But kill those that will help Her with weapons

in their hands. Try your best to protect Her, never to kill Her.

व्यास उवाच

इत्यादिष्टस्तव त्राता तस्या ध्रुपलोचनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

प्रणय युंभं सैन्येन वृतः शीर्धं ययो रणे ।

असाधूनां महस्वाणं घघ्टा तेपां वृतस्तथा ॥ 4 2 ॥

स ददर्श ततो देर्वी रयोघवनसंशिताम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! No sooner ordered thus by the king, Dhūmralocana bowed down to the king, and, accompanied by sixty thousand Dānava forces, quickly went to the battlefield and saw there that the Lady was sitting in a beautiful garden.”

दृष्टा तां भुगाशाङ्गी विनयेन सम्वित्तः ॥ 4 3 ॥

उवाच च्चनं शल्बगं हेतुमद्रभूषिव्मा ।

भ्यु तैये महाभागे शुभस्वविद्धरातुः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Seeing that deer-eyed Lady, Dhūmralocana began to address Her with great humility and in sweet words full of reason and goodness. O Devi! O highly Fortunate One! Hear! Śumbha is very much distressed owing to Thy absence.

दूतं प्रेषितवान्यार्थं त्व नीतिथगारः ।

स्वभंभपवीदानः सामपूर्वं लयि स्वयम् ॥ 45 ॥

नेतासगत्य वचः प्रोक्त विषतीतं वराने ।

Lest there be any break in the love sentiments, that King, a wise statesman, sent a messenger with instructions to speak Thee in sweet and suitable terms; but, O fair One! That messenger, on arriving before the King had told all the contrary words.

वचसा तेन मे भर्ता चिन्ताविष्टमान नृप: ॥ 46 ॥

बंभूव रसमार्गे सुंभ: कामविमोहित: ।

O Knower of love sentiments! Hearing thus the messenger's words, my lord Śumbha, sick with love, has become immersed in cares an anxieties. That messenger had not been able to realise the true meaning of Thy words.

सूनेत तेन ने सात हेतुगर्भ वचस्वल ॥ 47 ॥

यो मां जयित संग्रामे यदुक्तं काटिनं वचः ।

O honourable Lady! “The sentence uttered by Thee “He who will conquer me in battle” is full

Book V Chapter XXIV

of deep meanings; he was stupid; hence he could not realise the meaning of the word “battle” intended by Thee.

न ज्ञातसेन संग्रामो ब्रिविधः खलु मानिनि ॥ 4 8 ॥

रतिजोअलासाइज प्रापत्रे देववर्भितः ।

रतिजल्यवि यामोगे शग्रोत्स्मात्र: स्मृतः ॥ 4 9 ॥

सुखदः प्रथमः कानते दुःखद्धारिजः स्मृतः ।

ज्ञानाम्बं वरात्रेे भवत्या मानसं कित् ॥ 5 0 ॥

रतिसंगमभावसे हृदये परिवर्तेत ।

इति जन्मं विदित्या मां तलत्कारां नराधिप: ॥ 51 ॥

प्रेयमायाम सुभोउघ बलेन महान3उतून ।

O Beautiful One! “Battle” means two different things according to persons for whom it is intended; it is of two kinds—One out of excitement and another out of sexual intercourse. With Thee, the sexual intercourse is intended; and with any other enemy, excitement in a real fight is meant. Out of these, the fight of sexual intercourse is full of sweetness and the fight with enemies is painful. O Beautiful One! I know Thy intentions fully. In Thy heart reigns that fight of sexual intercourse. Knowing me as expert in these affairs, the king Šumbha has sent me today to Thee with a vast army.

चतुरासि महाभागे शृणु मे वचनं मृदु ॥ 52 ॥

भज सुभयं जितोकों देवदर्पिनहाईपम् ।

पुतजी प्रिया भूत्वा भूख्व भोगननुचमम् ॥ 53 ॥

O highly Fortunate Lady! Thou art clever and shrewd; hear my gentle words; serve Śumbha, the lord of the three worlds, the destroyer of the Deva's pride. Thou wilt be the dearest queen-consort and enjoy the best pleasures.

उर्वति तां महाबाहुः शुभम्: कामवलार्थवित् ।

विविचाकृतः हावांस्वे संप्रिय भावाकार्थियों ॥ ५४ ॥

The powerful Śumbha knows the real meaning of the fight of sexual intercourse; so he will easily conquer Thee. When Thou wilt shew various amorous gestures, he will also show his feelings.

भविष्यति कारिकेकयं तव नैं नासांखिणी ।

एवं संगार्योगेन पतिमं परमार्थवित् ॥ 55 ॥

जिवा तां सुकुषायायां पशिज्ञानो कर्णिष्ठिति ।

रक्तद्रोहां नखायातैर्दैनंश खण्डताथगम् ॥ 56 ॥

स्वेदविक्त्वां प्रभनां तां संविधास्यति भूपति: ।

भविता मानसः कामो रतितंभागजनम् ॥ 57 ॥

And the Kālika Devi, your companion will remain with Thee as a helping mate in your vital pleasure. The lord of the Daityas, expert in the science of love, will certainly conquer Thee engaged in amorous fight and will lay Thee stretched on a soft bedding and will make Thee tired; he will make Thy body covered with blood by striking with nails and he will bite Thy lips to pieces; then Thou wilt perspire profusely and will cease fighting. Thus Thy mental desire for fight—sexual intercourse—will be satisfied.

दर्शनाड्रण एवाले सुभ्म: सर्वान्तम प्रिये ।

वचनं कुर मे पथ्यं हितकृष्णविष येशन्तम् ॥ 58 ॥

O Beloved! At Thy mere sight Śumbha will be completely subject to Thee. Therefore dost Thou keep my sweet and beneficial words.

जय शुभं भणाध्यधं माननीयात्मानिनि ।

मद्भाग्याश्र ते नृनं हृत्यवृद्धिणश्र शे ॥ 59 ॥

Thou art an honourable Lady; and Thou wilt be highly honoured by all if Thou merriest Śumbha. Those are certainly very unfortunate who like fighting with weapons. O Beloved! The sexual intercourse is always favourite to Thee; therefore it is not worthy of Thee to fight with weapons.

न तद्योसि कान्ते चंख सदा सुत्तवल्लभे ।

अंगोंके कुर राजानं पाद्वाताविकासिन् ।

बकुलं सीधुसेंकेन तथा कुरबक कुरु ११ ६० ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे वैदीमहान्ये

चतुर्विंशोस्थाः ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore dost Thou make the king free of sorrows by pouring on him Thy mouth nectar and by making his heart bud forth by Thy kicking, as Bakula and Kurubaka trees blossom forth when drenched with mouth nectar and Aśoka trees gets blossomed by the kicking of woman.

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description Dhimralocana giving the news in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXV

On Dhūmralocana Killed

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्खा विरारामासी वचनं धूपतोचनः ।

प्रत्युवाच तटा काली प्रदस्य ललितं वचः ॥ १ ॥

विद्युक्सोसि जात्म लयं तैगतूय इव भापसे ।

दृषा मनोराखींशते कांपि मधुरं वदन् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Janamejaya! When Dhūmralocana ceased speaking, the Devi Kālikā made a wild laughter and began to speak sweetly thus: O Stupid! Skilled in flattery, you know only how to use jugglery of words like an actor; do you think that your ends will be served if you speak only sweet words; this can never be.

बलवाव्यलस्येषु: प्रेषितीप्स दुरामना ।

कुरु सुद्धे वृथा यादं मुंच मुक्रमतेधुना ॥ ३ ॥

O Stupid! Fight now; there is no need of useless words. You are strong and have been sent by that wicked Demon with a great army.

हत्वा रुष्यं निरुष्यं च त्वद्याव्याव वलाधिकान् ।

देवी कुंद्रा शराषातैर्जिष्यति निजालयम् ॥ 4 ॥

This Devi, out of wrath, will kill you, Šumbha, and Nisūmbha and other commanders by Her arrows and will then return to Her abode.

वसारी मंदपाति: शुभ्म: कव वा विध्यांगेति ।

असुकः खतुं संसारे विहाहित्धितेतः ॥ ५ ॥

Where is that stupid Sumbha? And where is this Devi, the Great Enchantress of the Universe! Their marriage in this world is entirely out of question and can never take place.

सिंही किं त्वितिकामाता जँबुक कुकते पतिम् ।

क्रिणी गर्दभे वापि गवयं सुरिधः क्रिपु ॥ ६ ॥

गच्छ शुभ्यं नित्यमं च वद सत्यं वयं चेम ।

कुक सुदूदं न चेघाड़ि पात्लां तस्पासंधुना ॥ ७ ॥

O Stupid! What do you think that a lioness becoming very passionate, would make an ordinary jackal her husband? or would a she elephant prefer an ass? or would a heavenly Cow

like a bison? Go to Śumbha and Niśumbha and tell truly to them: "Fight or go instantly to Pātāla."

व्यास उवाच

कालिकाया वचः शुचा स देत्यो धूपजोचना: ।

तापुवाच महाभाग क्रोधसंरक्तलोचना: ॥ ८ ॥

दूर्दैंग ल्चा निर्हलाजी सिंहं च दमवर्गितम् ।

गृहीतैनां गमियामि राजानं प्रत्यहं किल ॥ ९ ॥

रसभंभपथालाकि विषेपि निद्र साम्पतम् ।

नोचेतां निशितैर्वर्णीह्न्यय कलहप्रिये ॥ १ ० ॥

Vyāsa said: O Fortunate One! The Demon Dhimralocana, hearing thus the Kālika's words, became very angry and spoke with reddened eyes: "O Ugly One! I will slay Thee and this lion infatuated with pride in battle and take this Fair One to the king. O Kālī! I have not been able to do this simply it would break our amorous love sentiments. O Quarrelsome One! Otherwise I would have undoubtedly slain Thee just now with my sharpened arrows tipped with irons."

कालिकोवार

किं किवल्यासि मंटान्याजयं धार्यं धनुयात्मा ।

स्वासना युंच वितिष्ठान्तनाति यमवसिति ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing thus, Kālikā said: “O Fool! Why do you boast vainly? this is not the religion of a hero with bows and arrows in their hands, Shoot your arrows with all your might; I will send you to the realm of Death.”

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं दैत्वः संगूहा कार्मकं कुदम् ।

कालिकां तां शरासार्वेदवर्गतिलिजातिशितः ॥ १ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the Devi's words, Dhimralocana caught hold of his very strong bow and began to shoot arrows after arrows at Kālīkā.

देवायतु प्रेक्षकास्त्र विमानवरसर्यस्थतः ।

तां स्तुवंते जयेन्युद्वेदीं शक्रपुरोगमाः ॥ 13 ॥

Book V Chapter XXV

Indra and the other Devas came out to see the fight on their best cars in the celestial space and shouted “Victory to the Devi” and thus eulogised Her.

तयोः परस्यं युद्धं प्रवृतं चातिवहागणम् ।

बायाड़बागदाशक्तिमुसलातिद्धिकलटम् ॥ १४ ॥

कालिका बाणपातैसृत हवा पूर्व खतराव ।

वंभज तद्यं व्यूंदं जहास च मुडुमुई: ॥ १५ ॥

Then a deadly fight ensued between them with arrows, axes, clubs, Šaktis, and Mūsalas and various other weapons. Kalikā cut off at the very outset all the asses that carried the chariot by Her arrows and next broke his chariot and began to laugh repeatedly.

न चान्यं रथमाकडः कोपेन प्रज्वलम्रिति ।

बाणवृष्टि चकारागां कालिकोपर भारत ॥ 16 ॥

सारपि चिष्ठदेल तरसा तथ्य बाणानसंगतान् ।

मुगोचान्यगुवेगान्दानोपरि कालिका ॥ 17 ॥

O Bharata! Then Dhūmralocana becoming angry mounted on another chariot and began to shoot deadly arrows at Kālika. Kālika Devi, too, cut off those arrows into pieces before they reached Her and shot arrows after arrows on the Dānava in quick succession.

तैवाँणिन्हितास्तस्य पाणिण्याहः सहचशः ।

बर्षत्र च रर्थ वेगात्युतं हत्वा खरानपि ॥ 18 ॥

चिच्छेद निद्वुः सद्यो बाणैकरासद्रिभे: ।

मूंद चक्र सुराणों सा संखावटा तथाप्रकेतो ॥ 19 ॥

Thousands of his soldiers near to him were killed; the asses and the charioteer were killed and the cariot was broken. She cut off his arrows by Her swift serpent-like arrows and blew Her conchshell.

विद्य: परिधं गृछा सर्वलोहमयं दृछम् ।

आजगाम त्योपस्थ कुपितो धूखलेचनः ॥ 20 ॥

वाचा निर्भसैन्यकाली काललः कालसबिभः ।

अर्शैव त्वां हनिष्यामि कुरूपे पिंगलोचने ॥ 21 ॥

The Devas seeing this became very glad. Dhūmralocana, seeing himself displaced from his chariot, took up with anger his very strong Parigha

weapon and came near to the chariot of the Devi. Then the Dānava, terrific like death, began to abuse the Devi and said: "O Ugly tawny-eyed Kālī! I will kill Thee just now."

इत्युक्त्वा सहसा उपान्य परिवं प्रिषयते यदा ।

हूँद्रपेणैव तं भम्म चकार तरसांविका ॥ 2 2 ॥

Thus saying, he suddenly went near to Her and when he was about to throw his Parigha weapon on Her, the Ambikā Devi burnt him to ashes simply by Her loud shout (of defiance).

दृष्ट्वा भर्मपौहृतं दैत्वं सैनिका भयविक्रताः ।

चकुः पलायनं सढो हा तातैत्यबुवन्यथ ॥ २३ ॥

दैवास्तं निहतं बूद्या दानवं धूपलोचनम् ।

मुपुचुः पुच्यष्टिं ते मुदिता गगाने स्थिताः ॥ 2 4 ॥

Seeing Dhūmralocana burnt to ashes, his soldiers became panic stricken, and fled away immediately, crying aloud “O Father!” “O Father!” The Devas saw this and gladly showered from high heaps of flowers on the Devi.

राथूमितसदा राजन्द्रकाण सम्यघत ।

निरहतैनवरश्रेः खरेक्ष वाणैतशा ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The battle ground then assumed a dreadful appearance; at some places the slain Dānavas; at others, the horses; at other places elephants and at some other place the asses lay scattered on the field.

गृधा: काका वटा: ग्रेशेना वरभा जयुकासता ।

ननुद्धुकुगु: प्रेतान्यतितान् रणभूमिषु ॥ 26 ॥

The herons, crows, vultures, the Piśācas of the class Vatā, Varaphās and jackals and other carnivorous animals, began to dance wildly and clamor hideously at the sight of the dead bodies, lying on the field.

अधिका तरणाश्यानं त्यकवा दूर्यलान्ते ।

गत्वा चकार चायदूगं संश्वानं भयप्रद्ध ॥ 27 ॥

The Ambikā Devi then quitting the field, went to a distant place and blew Her conchshell so furiously and terribly that Śumbha heard that terrific noise, while he was sitting in his own residence.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तं श्रुता दरगबंदु तु शुभ: सचानि संस्थितः ।

दृष्टावश दानवाभ्यमानानातन्कीरोक्षितान् ॥ 28 ॥

छित्यपादकाश्रांश मझकारोपितानपि ।

भन्पुक्रकटिधीवाक्नन्द्यानाननेकशः ॥ 29 ॥

At the next moment, he saw that the Dānava forces had retreated, and they were coming there crying. Some of them were besmeared with blood all over the bodies; some had got their feet, some their arms, cut asunder, some were devoid of eyes, some had got their backs broken; some had their waists broken; some got their necks broken and some were going on bedsteads.

बीक्ष्य युष्पो निरुर्णेषु कव गतो घुप्तोषतः ।

कर्थे भन्या: समायाता ननीति किं वरानना ॥ 30 ॥

सैन्यं कुत्र गत मन्दा: कथवन्तु यथोचितम् ।

कयायं शुब्नानोडा श्रूयते भयवर्धनः ॥ 31 ॥

Seeing them thus, Sumbha and Niśambha asked them: “Where is Dhūmralocana? Why have you all retreated? And why have you not brought that Lady? Where are the other forces? Who has blown this horrible conchshell? O Fools! Inform me quickly and truly all these things.

गणा ऊचुः

बलं च पातितं सर्व निहतो धूपलोचनः ।

कृतं कालिकया कर्म रणभूमावमानुप्रम् ॥ 32 ॥

गंखवार्डपिंककायासु गगनं व्याय प्राते ।

हर्षद: सुरसंधानां दानवानां च शोककृत् ॥ 33 ॥

The soldiers said: “O King! Dhūmralocana has been slain by Kālikā; She has destroyed all the soldiers and has done extraordinary deeds. O King! Know the blowing of the conchshell that has caused terror in the hearts of the Dānavas and has enhanced the joy of the Devas and is being resounded in the celestial space, is that done by the Ambikā Devi.*

*Note: In the Mārkandeya Purāna, Ambikā killed Dhūmra.

यदा निपातिता: सर्वे तेन केसरणि विषो ।

रथा भवना ह्याधीक्ष बाणपातिर्विनारिताः ॥ 34 ॥

गगानस्या सुराधुकुः पुण्यवृष्टि मुदावित्वः ।

दूर्खा भवने वर्स सर्वे पातितं धूमलोचनम् ॥ 35 ॥

“O Lord! When the Devi broke the chariot of Dhimralocana by the multitude of Her arrows and killed the horses and at last slew Dhimralocana himself, when all the forces were slain by Her who appeared like a lion and when the rest of the army retreated, the Devas seeing all these were very much gladdened and showered flowers from the celestial sky.

निश्यस्तु कृतोउसामिभजीये नैव भवेदिति ।

विवारं कुरु राजेन्द्र मनिशिमर्शवितमेः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! We have come to a perfect conclusion that we will not get the victory; now consult with your expert ministers and do what is needful.

विस्योउं महाराज यदेतका जनद्विकला ।

भवाद्ध: सह युद्धाय संशिता सै-व्यावर्जिता ॥ 37 ॥

O King! The Supreme Goddess of the Universe is waiting there alone to fight with you without any help of any other forces; this is a great wonder to us.

निर्भयैकाकिनी बाला सिंहासुक्रा मटोल्कता ।

चिचमेनतमहाराज भासतेउद्धुमझसा ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Intoxicated with Her power, that Girl, fearless, is reigning there taking Her stand on the lion. All these seem wonderful to us.

सचिवा विश्राटो वारण खर्चा निवर्णमेव च ।

मन्त्रयिता महाराज कुरु कार्य व्यासचि ॥ 39 ॥

O King! Consult with your councillors and out of the four policies peace, fight, retreat or remaining neutral, accept what is best.

तस्त्रिधी बलं नास्ति त्वाधि श्रुतापन ।

पांशिग्राहाः सुराः सर्वे पंधिष्यन्ति किलापति ॥ 40 ॥

O Tormentor of the foes! True! There are no forces with the Devi, but the whole host of the Devas will take up Her cause in crisis, there is no doubt.

समये तस्मीपस्थौ जाती च हरिशुक्टी ।

लोकपाला: समीपेपेड्य वर्जने गनने स्थितः ॥ 4। 1 ॥

In due time, Hari and Hara both will come and assist Her, now the guardians of the several

Book V Chapter XXV

quarters, the Lokapālas are waiting by Her side in the celestial space.

स्वोगणाकु गन्थवीं: किसरा मानुशास्तथा ।

तत्सहायोष् मन्त्वा: समये सुत्तापन ॥ 42 ॥

O Tormentor of the Gods! Know that the Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and human beings all will come timely and help Her. O King! We guess all these.

अस्माकं मितिमानेन झालते सर्ववैधानम् ।

अंबिकाया: सहायाशा तत्कायीशा न काचन ॥ 43 ॥

But that Lady does not want the assistance of anyone nor does She expect that any other body would do the work for Her.

एका नाशयितुं शक्ता जानसर्वं चराचम् ।

का कथा दानवानां तु संवैषधपिति निश्रयः ॥ 44 ॥

इति ज्ञाला महाभागा यथा कचि तथा कुल ।

हितं सर्व मिति वाक्यं कतव्यमनुयाधिभि: ॥ 45 ॥

You must know this certainly, that She alone can destroy this whole Universe. What to speak of the Dānavas only! O Highly Fortunate One! Knowing all these, do as you like. It is the duty of the servants to speak beneficial and at the same time true words with moderation.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तेषां गुभम: पवलतादनः ।

कनीर्वांसं समानीय पप्रच्छ रहसि सिधतः ॥ 46 ॥

भातः कालिकापडोद निरहतो धूपतोषतः ।

बतं च शगतितं सर्वे गणा भवना: समापततः ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śumbha, the tormentor of others, hearing their words asked his younger brother in private: "O Brother! This Kālika has slain today Dhūmralocana with his forces; the few retreated and came over to me.

अधिका शंखतादं वै कोतित मन्दार्थित ।

जानितं चैव दुर्जीया गति: कालस्य सर्वेधि ॥ 48 ॥

दूर्णं वज्ञायते दूर्तं वज्जं चैव तृणायते ।

बलवान् बलहीन: स्याहैवस्य गतिरीयुगी ॥ 49 ॥

Now the Ambikā Devī, puffed up with pride is blowing Her conchshell. Brother! The ways of Time are knowable even to the wise. The grass

becomes a thunderbolt and the thunderbolt becomes like a grass and powerless.

पृष्ठधीय तां महाभाग किं कतन्यमतः परम् ।

अभोग्या चाधिक्वा नूनं कारणादत्र चागता ॥ 50 ॥

युक्ते पलायनं वीर युद्धे वा वद सल्वम् ।

लघुं ज्येष्ठे चित्रज्ञापिति त्वामई कार्यसंकटे ॥ 51 ॥

Know thus the course of Destiny. O Fortunate One! Now I ask you, what are we to do now? Are we to entertain yet the desire of enjoying Ambikā, or are we to fly away from here or are we to fight on? Say quickly. Though younger, in times of difficulty, I consider you as my elder.

निरुभ्य उवाच

न वा पलायनं युक्त न वुर्ग्रिद्धगं तथा ।

युद्धमेव परं श्रेय: सर्वेश्वरायताउनच ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing thus the Sumbha's words, Niśumbha said: "O Sinless One! Flight or taking refuge in a fort is not reasonable.

सरी-योर्ड गयिष्यायि रणे तु प्रवराशितः ।

हत्वा तामागयिष्यायि तसा त्ववलायीयम् ॥ 53 ॥

To fight with this Lady is the best course. I will take the best generals and soldiers with me and will slay that Lady and quickly return.

अथवा बलवदैवाद्यथा चेढ़ाविध्यति ।

मृते माय त्वया कार्य विमुग्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ 54 ॥

And if Fate be strong and prove it otherwise, then, after my death, think out again and again and do what is best."

इति तस्य वधः शूला शुभः प्रोवा चानुजम् ।

तिह तं चचडमुपडी द्वी गच्छेतां बलसंयुतो ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing thus the younger brother's words, Śumbha said "You better wait; let Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa go to the battle, surrounded with forces."

शशक्रामृद्धायात्र न सुक्तं गतयोचनम् ।

चण्डपुरुषी महावीरी तां हनुं सर्वेथा क्षमो ॥ ५६ ॥

To kill a hare it is not necessary to send an elephant. This is a very trifling matter; the two great warriors Candā and Mundā will be freely able to slay Her.

शूलुक्ला प्रातरं शुभ्यः सम्भाय च महावली ।

उवाच चचनं राजा चणदुम्ृद्धी पुरःस्थिति ॥ 57 ॥

गच्छतं चण्डपुण्डी हौ स्वसैन्यपरिवारिति ।

हन्तु तामवलों शीधि निर्लेक्जां मदार्थवितान् ॥ 58 ॥

Thus saying his younger brother, the King Śumbha addressed Caṇḍa Muṇḍa, who were waiting before him, thus: O Canda! O Muṇḍa! Take your forces and go quickly to kill that shameless Lady, puffed up with pride.

गृहीत्वाद निहत्याजी कालिकां पिंगलोचनाम् ।

आगम्यतां महापारी कृत्वा कार्य महत्ततम् ॥ 591 ||

O Pair of warriors! Kill that tawny-eyed Kālika in the battle and bring that Arnbikā Devi here quickly.

सा नायाति गृहीताउपि गर्हिता चाधिक्या यदि ।

तदा बाणीम्हातीक्षेणीर्नल्याउउद्वमपिछ्ठा ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकर्ये

पडविंशोउद्यानः ॥ 25 ॥

Do this Great Service. And if that haughty Ambikā be unwilling to come here, though taken as a captive, then kill that Durgā, the ornament of the battle, too, by sharp arrows.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Dhūmralocana in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXVI

On Caṇḍa Muṇḍa Killed

व्यास उवाच

इत्याज्त्ती तदा वीरी घण्डयुपडौ महावर्ती ।

जममुत्स्तरीबाबी सैन्येन महात्रान्विती ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered, the two strong warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa hurriedly went to the battle, accompanied by a vast army.

सूद्या तत स्थिता देईी देवानां हिततारिणीम् ।

ऊचतुस्ती महावीर्णी तदा सामान्तितं वचः ॥ 2 ॥

There they saw the Devi, intent on doing good to the Gods. Then they began to address Her in conciliatory words.

बाले तवं किं न जानासे शुभ्म सुचलादनम् ।

निरुभयं च महीवीर्य तृताषड्विजयोढ़तम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Lady! Dost Thou not know that the extraordinarily strong Sumbha and Niśumbha, the Lords of the Daityas have crushed down the Devas and vanquished Indra and have become intoxicated with their victory?

ल्यमेकासि वरारोहे कालिका सिंहसंयुता ।

जेतुपिछ्छसि दुर्बदैवं सुभ्यं सर्वबलात्विन् ॥ ४।।

O Fair One! Thou art alone! Only Kālikā and Thy Lion are with Thee! It is Thy foolishness that Thou art desirous to conquer Śumbha, who is endowed with all power.

मतिहः कोप्रिय ते नास्ति नारी वार्थि नरोप्रिय वा ।

देवात्मां प्रियल्येव विनागाय तवैव ते ॥ ५ ॥

I think there is no adviser to Thee, man nor woman; the Devas have sent Thee here simply for Thy destruction.

विषय्य कुर्त त्वर्धिके कार्य स्वपरयोबल् ।

अष्टादशभुजत्वाच्चं गर्व च कुक्रे मृषा ॥ 6 ॥

Think, O Delicate One over the power of Thine as well as those of Thy enemy. Vainly dost Thou boast of Thy having eighteen hands.

किं घुरौबैहुभिव्यंशैरियुः किं शमगदैः ।

गृष्मचयो सुराणां वे जेतु: स्मारगालिनः ॥ 7 ॥

Before the great warrior Šumbha, the conqueror of Devas, many hands and many weapons will be useless; they will prove mere burden.

ऐरावतकरच्छेनृदितन्तरणाकारिणः ।

जयितः सुरसंघानां कार्य कुक्र मनोत्तम् ॥ 8 ॥

So dost Thou fulfil what reigns in the heart of Śumbha, the destroyer of the legs and the uprooter of the teeth of Airāvata elephant.

वृथा गवायसे कान्ते कुक्र मे वर्चनं विध्वम् ।

हितं तव विशालासिं सुखदं दुःखनागनम् ॥ ९ ॥

Vain is Thy boast, O Beloved! Follow my sweet words; they will do good to Thee, O Large-eyed One! They will destroy Thy pains and give Thee bliss.

Book V Chapter XXVI

दुःखदानि च कार्याणि त्यास्यानि दूततो बुधेः ।

सुखदानि च सेव्यानि शास्त्रत्वशिगारदेः ॥ 10 ॥

Those actions that lead to pain are to be avoided by the wise; and those that bring in happiness are to be served by the Pandits, versed in the Śāstras.

चतुराति चिकालापे पश्य शुभ्यबलं महत ।

प्रत्यक्षं सुरपेक्षायां मदौनेन महोदयम् ॥ ११ ॥

प्रत्यक्षे च परित्यज्य वृषेवानुभिति: ब्रिक्त ।

सन्देहसिते कार्ये न विषधित्यवर्ते ॥ १२ ॥

O Sweet speaking one! Thou art clever. Look at the great strength of Śumbha with Thy eyes. He has enhanced his glory by crushing the Devas. And if Thou thinkest the gods superior, that is false, for the wise men do not rely on mere guess, full of doubts; they believe what they actually see.

शुः सुगणं परमः शुभः समरुद्धिनः ।

तस्मात्तं प्रेर्यल्य देवा दैत्येयपीर्तितः ॥ 13 ॥

Šumbha, hard to be conquered in battles, is the great enemy of the Gods; they have been crushed down by him, and have therefore sent Thee here.

तस्मात्तद्वनै: सिनर्धैवैचितासि सुचिसिते ।

दुःखाय तव तेवानां शिक्षा स्वार्थस्य साक्षित्य ॥ 14 ॥

O Sweet smiling One! Thou hast been deceived by their sweet words; they, prompted by their selfish ends, have sent Thee here simply to give Thee trouble.

कार्यमिति परिशिष्य धर्ममिति समाश्रयेत् ।

देवा: स्वार्थपरा: कामं त्वामहं सत्यमवर्णम ॥ 15 ॥

The friends that come with certain business and selfish ends are to be rejected. Friends out of religious motives are only to be sought for refuge. Verily I tell Thee that the gods are terribly selfish.

भत्र शुर्णमं सुरेशानं जेतारं भुवनेक्षरम् ।

चतुरं सुन्दरं शूरं कामाशाखियशाराद् ॥ 16 ॥

Therefore dost Thou serve Sumbha, the conqueror of Indra and the lord of the three worlds; he is a hero, beautiful, lovely, cunning and thoroughly expert in the science of coronous love.

ऐभूयं सर्वतोकानां प्रायस्ये शुभाशासनान ।

निश्रयं परमं कृत्वा भतरिं भव जांशेभनम् ॥ 17 ॥

Thou wilt get the prosperity of all the worlds by the mere command of Sumbha; therefore make a firm resolve and serve that splendid husband Sumbha."

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा चंडस्य जगद्धिक्वा ।

मेधामार्थीनिरन्ति जगर्जं पुनरबहित् ॥ 18 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Universal Mother, hearing the words of Canda spoke with a voice deep as thunder. "O Boor! Why do you use false deceitful words?

गच्छ जात्म युषा किं त्वं भाषसे वंचकं वचः ।

त्यक्ता हरिदात्रादीक्ष शुभ्मं कस्माद्वजे पतिम् ॥ १९ ॥

Fly away just now. Why shall I make Śumbha my husband, disregarding Hari, Hara and the other Devas?

न मे कक्रित्यति: कार्यं न कार्य पतिना सह ।

स्वामिनी सर्वभृतानामहमेव निजामय ॥ 20 ॥

गृभा मे बह्वो दृषा निशुप्भाशु सहस्वण: ।

घातिताश मया पूर्वे शतगो देत्यदानतः ॥ 21 ॥

O You, a veritable Fool! I have no necessity for My lord; I have got nothing to do with my lord. I Myself am the Lord of all the beings; and I preserve this whole Universe with all the lord and beings therein. Note this. In ancient times I saw thousands and thousands of Śumbha and Niśumbha and I slew them all.

ममगो देवेबंदान विन्णधिन चुगे चुगे ।

नाशं यास्यसिं दैत्यानां युधानि पुनरब है ॥ 22 ॥

I sent hundreds and hundreds of Daityas and Demons to the realm of Death. Before Me the hosts of Devas were destroyed in yugas after yugas.

काल एवागतोउस्यत्र दैत्यसंहाराकारकः ।

वृथा त्वं कुर्ये चर्न स्थणायामसर्तेनैः ॥ 23 ॥

Today the Daityas again will go unto destruction. The Time has come to destroy the Daityas; why, then, are you struggling in vain with your followers for your lives?

कुर्यु पूर्वे वीरधर्मश्रव्ये त्वं महामते ।

मरणे भावि दुस्त्याज्यं योगे रक्ष्यं महात्माधि: ॥ 24 ॥

Fight now and keep the Dharma of the warriors; death is inevitable; thinking thus, the high-soiled ones should keep their name, fame, and respect.

क्रि ते कार्व निर्गुभ्येन रुष्येने च दुर्जान्ता ।

वीराधर्म परं प्राया गछ्छ स्वर्ग सुरालयम् ॥ 25 ॥

What business have you to do with Sumbha and Niśumbha? Follow the warrior's Dharma and go to Heavens, the abode of the gods.

गुष्पो निरुष्णश्रवीये चे चात्र तव बांधावः ।

सर्वे तवानुगा: पशुततापीम्यन्ति साम्यान् ॥ 26 ॥

Sumbha, Niśumbha and your other friends and followers, all will follow you and will come here no doubt.

क्रभशः सर्वेटैल्यानां कारीध्यायघु संक्षयम् ।

विवादं त्वज मन्दात्मकुन कुवूदं विश्रापिते ॥ 27 ॥

O Stupid One! I will put an end to all the Dānavas today. Therefore cast aside your weakness and go on, fight.

त्वामहं निर्हायाम विभारंत तव साम्यात् ।

ततः शुभ्यं निर्गुभं च रत्कबीजं मदोत्कटम् ॥ 28 ॥

अन्योक्षा दानवासर्वन्हल्वाउई समरोगेण ।

I will slay you and your brother just now; next I will kill the proud Rakta Bija, Nisumbha and Śumbha and the other Dānavas in the battlefield and will then go to My desired place.

गमिथामि यथास्थानं तिष्ठ वा गच्छ वा हुतम् ॥ 29 ॥

गृहाणालं च्या पुरु कुरु युद्धे मावअरुना ।

कि जल्यसि मुषा वाक्यं सर्वेण कातरिप्रियम् ॥ 30 ॥

Now remain here if you like or fly away quickly. You have been fed in vain because you fear to fight. What use is there now in using sweet words like a weak and distressed man. Well! Take up your arms now and fight."

व्यास उवाच

त्येवं प्रेति दैवी चडपुण्डी कृपास्तिति ।

न्याशर्धं तसा घोरं चक्रतुर्बतद्विती ।। ३। ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Candā and Munḍa, elated with pride, got excited at the Devi's words, became angry and made a violent noise with their bow strings.

सापि शंख्यवनं चके पुरवन्ती दिशो दग ।

सिंहोर्पि कुपितस्तावजारं समकारेहली ॥ ३ ३ ॥

The Devi, too, blew Her conchshell so loudly that the ten quarters of the sky reverberated; in the meanwhile, the powerful lion became very angry and roared loudly.

तेन नानेव शक्राधजा जहरुंपरमरस्तव ।

मुनयो यक्षान्यावीः सिद्धाः साधायश क्रिकराः ॥ 33 ॥

Hearing that sound Indra and other Devas, the Munis, Yakṣas, Siddhas, and Kinnaras became all very glad.

युद्धे परस्परं तत्र जातं कातरभीतिदम् ।

चिण्डकावणद्योस्तीयं बाणाखुरणादिषिः ॥ 34 ॥

A dreadful fight then ensued between Caṇḍikā and Caṇḍa with arrows, axes and other weapons, causing terror to the weak.

चण्डपुकाळप्रत्यदेवी चित्रद्रेर निशितः शरैः ।

युमोच पुनस्त्याजाराचाङ्गिडिका पत्रगानिव ॥ 35 ॥

The Caṇḍikā Devi became very wrathful and cut off to pieces all the arrows shot by Caṇḍa and then hurled arrows serpent-like on him.

गगनं छात्रितं तत्र संग्रामे विगिर्छेस्तदा ।

शलभैरिव मेघान्ते कर्षिकाणां घयप्रदेः ॥ 36 ॥

Then the sky over the battle ground seemed to be overcast with arrows just as the clouds get covered over with locusts, dreadful to the cultivators.

मुण्डोरि सैनिकः सार्थ प्रपात तरसा रणे ।

मुभोच बाणवृहिं है कूढ़ः परमदाकणः ॥ 37 ॥

In the meanwhile Munda, exceedingly terrible, came up to the field, taking with him his army and becoming impatient with anger began to shoot arrows.

वाणजलं महदुपृथवा कुढ़ा तर्याविका भुग्ग।

कोपेन वदर्त नत्या बभूव घनपात्रिभम् ॥ 38 ॥

कदलीषुधपनें च भुकुटीकुटिलं ततां ।

निष्काना च तदा काती ललाद्धपलकादु हुणम् ॥ 39 ॥

Seeing that multitude of arrows, Ambikā got very angry; out of Her frowny look, Her eyebrows became crooked, Her face became black, and Her

Book V Chapter XXVI

eyes turned red like Kadalī flowers; at this time suddenly came out of Her forehead Kālī.

బాహ్వమన్నా క్రు నాక్రమన్నాన్నా ।

मुड़समालाधर थोरा शुक्वावासीमोदरा ॥ 40 ॥

खदुपाणप्रधान्डतीव बीषणा भयदाविनी ।

खद्वोगायारिणी रैत्रा कालगात्रियराया ॥ 41 ॥

वित्तीणिद्वाना चिज्ञां चालयन्ती मुहुर्दुः ।

वित्तारजघन वेगाजघायानुरसैरिकान् ॥ 42 ॥

Wearing the tiger's skin, cruel, covering Her body with elephant's skin, wearing a garland of skulls, terrible, with a belly like a well dried up, mouth wide open, with a wide waist, lip hanging loosely, with axe, noose, Śiva's weapon, in Her hands, She looked very terrible like the Night of Dissolution. She began to lick frequently and forcibly dashed into the Dānava army and began to destroy it.

करे कृत्वा महावीरांतसरा सा रुचान्यिता ।

मुखे चिश्वेप देतेतायिपेष दूरनैः रानैः ॥ 43 ॥

She angrily began to take the powerful Dānavas by Her arms and pouring them into Her mouth crushed them with Her teeth.

गजान्यंदायितान्हसे गृहीला निदधे मुखे ।

सारोहान्यक्षयित्वाजी सहुहासं चकार ह ॥ 44 ॥

Taking the elephants with bells by Her own power in Her hands She put them all into Her mouth and swallowed them all with their riders and began to laugh hoarsely.

तथैव तुरागदुर्गलक्षा साराधिभः सह ।

निश्रिय वक्रेः दूरनैश्वैल्यंतिभेदस्य ॥ 4 5 ॥

Thus camels, horses and charioteers with chariots all She put into Her mouth and began to chew them all grimly.

हन्यमानं बलं ग्रेक्ष्य चणद्युपही महासुरी ।

छाव्यामासतुहैंवी बाणासारित्नन्ते: ॥ 4 6 ॥

चणड्छश्डकन्छायं चकं चक्धभाग्युम् ।

चिश्वेग तसा देहीं नानद च मुहुंमुँः ॥ 47 ॥

नन्तं वीक्ष्य तं काली रथांगं च रविष्यम् ।

बाणौनैकेन चिष्छेद सुप्रभं तल्युदर्शनम् ॥ 48 ॥

O King! Seeing that the forces were being thus destroyed, the two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa began to shoot arrows after arrows without intermission and covered the Devi with them. Chaṇḍa hurled the Sudarśana-like disc, lustrous like the Sun, with great force against the Devi, and frequently shouted thundering cries.

तं जयाने शरैस्तीक्षीशुष्टं चेषडी शिलाशिति: ।

मूँछितोउसी यपातोल्यों देवीबाणादिती० भृणम् ॥ ४ १ ॥

Seeing him roaring and the lustrous disc coming towards Her like another sun, She shot at him arrows sharpened on stones so that the warrior Caṇḍa became overpowered by them and lay down senseless on the ground.

पतितं भारतं बीक्ष्य मुण्डो दुःखादितस्तदा ।

चकार शरबृष्टि च कारिकोषपि कोपतः ॥ ५० ॥

The powerful Muṇḍa seeing his brother unconscious became very much distressed with grief, but he got angry and began to shoot arrows immediately on the Devi.

चण्डिका मुण्डविन्मुक्तां शरबृष्टि सुदारुकाणम् ।

ईयिकाखैर्वीन्यृकैश्यकार तिलशः क्षणगत् ॥ 51 ॥

अधिन्द्रेण बाणेन ताउवामास तं पुनः ।

पतितोउसी महावीर्वों मेहिन्यां मदवर्जितः ॥ 52 ॥

Candjikā Devi hurled the weapon named Iṣikā and thus cut off to pieces all the dreadful arrows of Muṇḍa in a moment and shot Ardha Candra (semi-circular) arrow at him. With this arrows the powerful Asura was deprived of his pride and made to lie down unconscious on the earth.

हाहाकारो महानासीहानवांग केले तदा ।

जहरुप्रमरा: सर्वे गतपन्स्वा गतपत्यतः ॥ 53 ॥

Mundra thus lying on the ground, a great uproar arose amidst the army of the Dānavas; and the Devas became delighted in the sky.

बिहाय मृहां चण्डसु मंग्रहा महर्ती गदाम ।

तरसा ताड्यामास कालिकां दक्षिणे घुजे ॥ 54 ॥

In the meanwhile Caṇda became conscious and taking a very heavy club hurled it violently on the right hand of Kālīkā.

वंचियत्वा गद्यापाते तं बबंध महासुरम् ।

तस्या बाणपाणेन मन्युक्तेन कांकिका ॥ 55 ॥

Kālīkā rendered that blow useless and instantly tied down that Asura by Her Pāśa weapon, purified by Mantras.

उदयित्रु तदा मुण्डो बबंदं दूध्यानुर्ज बलात् ।

आजगाम सुस्मद्धः शफिंक कृत्वा कें दूबम् ॥ 56 ॥

आपच्छन्तं तदा काली दानवं वीथ्य सत्यम् ।

बबंध तरसा तं तु द्वितीयं घातरं भृणम् ॥ 57 ॥

Mundā again rose up, and, seeing his brother in that fastened condition, came to the front well armoured and with an exceedingly strong weapon called Śakti. Seeing the Asura coming, She instantly fastened him down like his brother.

गृहीता ती महावौं चण्डपुर्णी शशगवित्र ।

कुकंती विपुर्णे हासमाजगमाधिकां प्रति ॥ 58 ॥

आयात्य तमाध्योवाच गृणोगेमी पशु प्रिये ।

राण्यज्ञाथीमांती दानवी रणुदुर्जी ॥ 59 ॥

Taking the powerful Caṇḍa and Munḍa like hares and laughing wildly, Kālī went to Ambikā, and said: "I have brought the two beasts very auspicious as offerings in this sacrificial war. Kindly accept these."

तावानीती तत वीक्ष चफिड का तेचुकावि ।

अंबिका कालिकां प्राड़ माधुर्गस्वरुं वचः ॥ 6० ॥

Seeing the two Dānavas brought, as if they were the two wolves, Ambikā told her sweetly: "O Thou, fond of war!

वर्ध मा कुक मा मुंच चतुरासि रणाधिये ।

देवानां कार्यसंभितिः कर्सेवा तरसा तवा ॥ 6 1 ॥

Thou art very wise; so dost not commit the act of envy nor dost leave them; think over the purport

of my words and know that it is Thy duty to bring the Deva's work to a successful issue."

व्यास उवाच

इति तथा वचः शुत्वा कालिका प्रह तां पुनः ।

यूद्वम्येज्ञतिविज्ञायते खड्यो यूये प्रतिक्ति ॥ 6 2 ॥

आलम्भे च करिष्यासि यथा हिंसा न जायते ।

इन्युक्त्वा सा तत देवी छखुर्जन ऐगरसी तयोः ॥ 6 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of Ambikā, Kālikā spoke to Her again: "In this warsacrifice there is this axe which is like a sacrificial post; I will offer two as victims to Thy sacrifice. Thy no act of envy will be committed (i.e., killing in a sacrifice is not considered as envy)."

चकर्ते तरसा काली पपी च रधिरं मुदा ।

एवं देयो हनौ दृष्टवा मुदतोगाच चाधिक्व ॥ 64 ॥

कृतं कार्य सुराणां ते ददाय्यघ वरं शुभम् ।

चण्डपुरुषी हर्ती यसात्स्याने नाम कालिके ।

चामुपडेति सुविख्यातं भविष्यति धरातले ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्दे

चंचदुपुरुवर्षे चद्विरोगेअवारः ॥ 26 ॥

Thus saying, the Kālikā Devi cut off their heads with great force and gladly drank their blood. Thus seeing the two Asuras killed, Ambikā said gladly: "Thou hast done the service to the gods; so I will give Thee an excellent boon. O Kālikā! As Thou hast killed Çanda and Muṇda, henceforth Thou wilt be renowned in this world as Cāmuṇḍa."

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Çanda and Muṇḍa in Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXVII

On the Fight of Raktabija

व्यास उवाच

हतौ तौ दानवी नुद्ध्या हतोगेभ्यो श्वैनिकाः ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा जम्पुः सर्वे गृप प्रति ॥ १ ॥

भिनांगा विशिष्टः केचित्केवचिष्छकरास्तथा ।

कौधरस्वावदेहाश्र चतंतेगभिवयुः परे ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Seeing the two Dānavas killed in the battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to Śumbha. Some of them were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had their arms severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying into the city.

Book V Chapter XXVII

गत्या दैत्यपति सर्वे चकुर्बुबारवे मुङुः ।

रक्ष रक्ष महाराज भक्षत्यच्छ कालिका ॥ 3 ॥

On reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make frequently the noise indicative of danger and exclaimed “O King! Save us, Save us; Kālika is devouring everything today.”

तया हर्ते महावीरो चपड़पुण्डी सुरादनी ।

भक्षिताः सैनिकाः सर्वे वर्ष भन्पा भयतुतः ॥ 4 ॥

The two great warriors Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the tormentors of the Devas, were slain by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have fled away panic stricken.

भीतिदं च रणस्वानं कृतं कालिकया प्रभो ।

पातितैर्गवीराधेदिंदिसरक्पदातिभि: ॥ 5 ॥

O Lord! Kālika has rendered the battle-field horrible by the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, and foot soldiers.

शोणतोषवहा कुल्या कृता मोसातिकदर्भा ।

कैगशैलिनी भन्नरधघक्रविराता ॥ 6 ॥

छिडबाढ़ापिमल्याड्या शीर्भेत्रीजलान्धिता ।

भयदा कातताणां वै सुगणां मोदखर्दिनि ॥ 7 ॥

A river of blood is flowing there is which the flesh of the soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet are like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds).

कुलं रक्ष महाराज पातालं गच्छ सत्यम् ।

कूद्धा देवी क्षयं सचः कार्चिति न संगया ॥ 8 ॥

O king! Save your line; go quickly to Pātāla. The Devi has become angry and will, no doubt, destroy our race.

सिंहोरपि भक्षत्याजी दानवाद्नुनेक्षर ।

तथैव कालिका देवी हाँत बाणैरनेकथा ॥ 9 ॥

Even the lion is eating away the Dānavas; and the Kālīkā Devi is killing innumerable Dānavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O king! What intentions are you cherishing in your mind?

तस्माचवमी राजेन्द्र मरणाय मृषा मतिम् ।

कंरोष सहितो धाता शुभ्येन कुपिताशय: ॥ 10 ॥

किं कंचिति नारैघा कृता कुलिवनाशिन।

यस्या हेतोर्महाराज हेतुमिष्ठसि बोधयान् ॥ १ १ ॥

Is it that you have desired to be merely slain with your younger brother Niśumbha! And what good purpose will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose sake, you have desired to kill all your friends?

दैवधाती महाराज लोके जयपराजये ।

अल्याधीय महदुःखं बुद्धिमात्र प्रकल्यन्ते ॥ 12 ॥

O king! Victory or defeat in this world are under the Daiva. The wise never risk to meet with great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim.

चित्रं पश्य विधेः कर्म यद्धीनं जगत् प्रभो ।

निह्ता ताक्षसा: सर्वे तिक्वा पश्येकाउन्पाय ॥ 13 ॥

O Lord! Look at the wonderful deeds of that Great Creator? What more wonder can there be than this that a woman alone killed all the Dānavas. जेता त्वं लोकपालानां वैन्ययुक्ता हि संधानम् ।

एका प्रार्थयते बाला युद्धायेति सुसंधभः ॥ 14 ॥

O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all the Lokapālas (guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that Lady, though alone and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you to fight.

पुरा त्वया तपस्तपं पुक्रते देवतायने ।

वद्दानाय संप्राणो बहा लोकपितामहः ॥ 15 ॥

ध्योक्तिस्तर्व महाराज वर्ग वर्य सूत्रत ।

तदा त्वयाभरन्त च प्रार्थितं ब्रहणा: किन ।। 16 ॥

O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of Puskara, the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities when Brahmā, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be immortal.

देवदैत्यमनुषेधनो न भवेन्मरणं मम ।

सर्पिक्रतयक्षेध्च: पुंलिङ्गवाचकादि १। १७ ॥

But when Brahmā refused to grant it you wanted from him and were granted that you would not be killed by any male being, be he a Deva,

Dānava, a man, Nāga, Kinnara, Yakṣa, or any other person.

तस्मारां हनुकामीय प्राप्ता योषित्वा प्रभो ।

यूद्म म कुर फजेन्द्र विषार्विं हियाउंगून ॥ 18 ॥

O Lord! For that very reason we think now that this Lady has timely come to kill you. Think over it seriously and cease fighting.

देवी होया महामाया प्रकृति: परमा मता ।

कल्प्यतकाले राजेन्र सर्वसंहारकारिणी ॥ 19 ॥

O King! This Devi is the great Mahā-Maÿā, the Highest Prakṛti; It is She that devours everything at the end of a Kalpa.

उत्पादयिती लोकानां देवनामीक्षी शुभा ।

विरुणा तामसी देवी सर्वशक्तिसमवित्ति ॥ 20 ॥

This auspicious Devi is the Creatrix of all the worlds and the Devas. She is the embodiment of the three qualities, endowed with all the powers.

जज्यच चाक्षया निवा सर्वज्ञा च सदोदिता ।

वेदमाता च गाययी संध्या सर्वसुगतया ॥ 21 ॥

She is Tāmasi, i.e., is the Destructrix of the whole world. This Devi can never be conquered, Imperishable, Eternal, She is the Sandhyā and the Refuge of the Devas.

निर्णीग सुगण सिद्धा सर्वसिद्धप्रदास्थ्या ।

आनन्दोद्ध उनन्ददा गौरी देवानामभयप्रदा ॥ 22 ॥

She is Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas. She is All-knowing and always manifested. This Undecaying Lady is void of any Prākṛtic attributes, though She at times possesses attributes.

एवं जाला महाराज वैरभावं स्वाज्ञाय ।

गरणं जज राजेन्द्र देवी त्वां पतायिष्यति ॥ 23 ॥

She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to all; She is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gauri bids all the Devas discard all their fears.

आज्ञाको भवेतावा: संजीवय निजं कुलम् ।

हतोगेश्ठा ये दैत्यासे भवन्तु चितयपुष: ॥ 24 ॥

She is Śuddha Sattva. Thus knowing, O king! Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the Devi would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your race. Then the

remnant Dānavas will be able to live for a very long time."

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः श्रुवा शुभमः सुरबलादिनः ।

उवाच बचनं तव्यं वीरवर्गे गृणान्वितम् ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus, Šumbha, the conqueror of the Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero.

शुभ्य उवाच

मानं कुर्वर्तु भो मेदा यूयं भगना रणाधिजित् ।

शीधं गछ्ठत पातालं जीविताशा बतीयसी ॥ २ ६ ॥

Śumbha said: “O Fools! Hold your tongue. You have fled because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to Pātāla without any delay.

दैवाधीनं जानसर्वं का चिन्तानज जये मम ।

देवास्तबैव ब्रहादा देवाधीना चयं यथा ॥ 27 ॥

This world is under the control of Fate; so I need not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahmā and other Devas are under it.

ब्रह्मा विष्युध मृत्रोयं यमोर्जनवैरभत्सता ।

सूर्यश्रुस्त्वाण शक्र: सर्वे दिवशग: किति ॥ 28 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Sūrya, Candra, and Indra are all under the sway of this Destiny.

का चिता ताई्धे मे मंदा यद्धावि तद्धाविषिति ।

उड्यमस्ताङ्गो भूयादूर्गी भवित्यन्ता ॥ 29 ॥

O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly come to pass. What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to be of such a nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate.

सर्वेवैव विचार्यैव न शेणैस्ति वुभा: क्वचित् ।

स्वधर्ष न त्वजेनीतु जानिनो मरणाद्वान् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus thinking, the wise never grieve; especially the wise ones never leaves their own Dharma for fear of death.

सुखं दुःखं तथेवायुर्जीवितं मरणं नृगाण ।

क्राने घवाति संग्रामे सर्वेश दैवनिर्मितम् ॥ 31 ॥

बह्ञा पतिति काले सेव विद्युध पार्वतीपति: ।

नाशुब्धल्यायुगोंने सर्वे देवा: सवासया: ॥ 32 ॥

Book V Chapter XXVII

तथाड़मपि कालस्य वर्गगः सर्वेधार्धुना ।

नाश जयं वां नानासि स्वधर्मपरिणतन्ति । 33 ।।

The happiness, pain, longevity, birth and death of all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate when their proper time arrives. See! When the time is over, Brahmā, Viṣṇuṇad Mahādeva, the lord of Pārvati die away; on the expiration of their terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to destruction.

आहृतोंप्रयनया कामं युद्धायावलया किल ।

कर्च पत्नायपनरो जीवेये शरादों शगन् ॥ 34 ॥

करिष्यायद्य संगाय यद्धावि तद्वारवित्व ।

जयो वा मरणं वाउपि स्वीकृतोमि यथा तथा ॥ 35 ॥

Similarly I am also completely under the sway of time; so what doubt is there that I, too, will go to destruction when I have observed my own Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own will; how can I fly away and live hundreds of years.

दैवं पिथ्येति विह्जोसो वदन्युधामविन्दि: ।

युनिक्षुर्फं बचसेवो थे जानंत्यिभाषपितुम् ॥ 36 ॥

I will fight today, Let the result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or defeat whatever the case may be.

उद्यमेन विना कामं न सियत्थिन मनोराशः ।

काता एव जल्पनिति यद्धान्यं तद्धाविषयति ॥ 37 ॥

अनुर्धे बलवन्यूहा: प्रवदन्ति न पशिडता: ।

प्रमाणं तस्य सचो क्रिममुळयं दूरयते कर्ण ॥ 38 ॥

The learned approving of the cause of efforts declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their saying know that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved; weak persons depend on the destiny.

अनुहें स्वार्थ पूर्वे स्यादेषा मूर्खिधिभिका ।

अललब्यं विवेर्वेया दुःः येचितस्य धाणा ॥ 39 ॥

Foolish persons say that Fate is strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then be seen? Has anybody seen Fate?

चक्रीममीपे संश्रिय संश्रित्यापीटकाशिणी ।

उद्यमेन विना पिछे न भवत्वेव सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

It is simply a scare for the illiterate; remedy only to console one's mind in times of distress. Simply proximity to a grindmill without any man's effort cannot grind a material.

उद्यो च कृते कार्य सिंद्धि यायेव सर्वथा ।

कदाचित्तस्य न्यूनले कार्य नैव भवेद्येच ॥ 41 ॥

Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity of the work, success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in proportion, the work does not come to a successful issue.

देशं कालं च विज्ञाय स्ववलं शुज्जं बलम् ।

कृतं कार्य भवत्येव बृहस्यतिचरो यथा ॥ 42 ॥

If time, place and one's enemies' forces be correctly taken into account and then if the proper attempts be made, success follows; thus Brhaspati has said."

व्यास उवाच

इति निश्रय दैत्येन्द्रो रक्तवीजं महासुरम् ।

प्रेयामास संग्रामे सैयेन मतहातुम् ॥ 43 ॥

Vyāsa said: O (King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the powerful Raktabija to the battle with a vast army.

गृष्म उवाच

रक्तबीज महाबाहो गच्छ लं व समारंगोगे ।

कुक युद्धं महाभाग यथा ते बतलाथहितम् ॥ 44 ॥

Śumbha said: “O Raktabjā! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your forces.

त्कर्जित ज्ञाच

महाराज न ते कार्या चित्ता स्वत्यतारीय वा ।

अहमंनी हनिष्यापि करिष्यापि वरते तब ॥ ४५ ॥

पश्य मे युद्धचातुर्यं केवयं बाला सुराया ।

दार्ती तेर्ह करिष्यापि तिजेपांा समेर वतत् ॥ ४ ६ ॥

Raktabīja said: “O king! You need not be a bit anxious for this work. Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under your control. Please see my skill in this warfare; that Lady, favourite of the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her your slave.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>व्यास उवाच</td></tr><tr><td>जूल्याध्य कुरक्रशे त्क्त्रीजो महापुरः ।</td></tr><tr><td>जगाम रथामक्हा स्वसैन्यपरिवारितः ॥ 47 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>हस्वयश्रयपादान्त्वन्देश परिवहितः ।</td></tr><tr><td>निर्वर्णाम रथाकडो देवीं शैलोपरि स्थितगम ॥ 48 ॥</td></tr></table>

Vyāsa said: O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful Raktabijā mounted on his chariot and went to the battle accompanied by his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, infantry, chariots and elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from the city for that Devi, seated on a mountain top.

तमागतं समालोक्य देवौशुकुमवादयत् ।

भवदं सर्वदैत्यानां देवानां मोदवधान् ॥ 49 ॥

शुत्वा शुबुस्वनं चोघं रक्तकीज्ञोतिवेगान् ।

गत्वा समीपे चामुपडां बभावे चवनं मृदु ॥ 50 ॥

Then the Devi, seeing him coming, blew Her conchshell; the Dānavas were terrified at that sound and the joy of the Devas increased. Hearing that sound Ratkatbija came very hurriedly to Cāmupāda and began to speak to Her sweetly.

रत्कारीज उवाच

वाले कि मां भीषधसि मत्वा तं व कातरं हिये ।

शढ़ान्देत नत्विकु वैसि किं धूपलोचनम् ॥ 51 ॥

"O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with the sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a Dhimralocana?

रक्तबीजीसि नामाद्रई तलसकाशिमहागत: ।

युद्धेष्ठ योत्सिकालापे सज्ञा भव भयं ने ॥ 52 ॥

O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabjja; I have come here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I am not a bit afraid of that.

पश्यादि मे वर्लं काने सूदा ये कातारत्स्वया ।

नाहं पैंकितानतेर्षा कुक युद्धं ययेच्छसि ॥ 53 ॥

युद्धाश सेविता: पूर्व नीतिशाखं श्रुत त्वया ।

पठितं चार्यविज्ञानं विद्वूर्तोही कृतास्ववा ॥ 54 ॥

साहित्यतन्त्रविज्ञानं चेदिस्त तव सून्ति ।

शुणु पे चचनं पध्य तत्थं प्रमितिबृहितम् ॥ 55 ॥

रसानां च नवानां वे हुावेव मुख्यतां गते ।

शुज्ञाकः शान्तिसो विद्वज्ञनसभासु च ॥ 56 ॥

O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I do not belong to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest and then Thou wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If Thou didst serve the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the science of politics and morals, if thou hadst studied the political economy, joined the assemblage of the Pandits or if Thou hast been well versed in literature and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel which will serve as a medicinal diet to Thee.

त्योः शूक्रात एवाटी नृपभावे प्रतिहितः ।

विष्णुर्वंक्षया सहातेवे स वासिव्या चतुरानः ॥ 57 ॥

Out of the nine sentiments, the Śrīgāra (Amorous love sentiments) and Śānti (Peace) are considered as the chief by the assemblage of the Paṇdits. Again out of these two, the love sentiment is the king.

शब्येत्र: शैलमुतया शक्रूर: सह श्रेते ।

वल्या युक्षो मुगो मृया ककोलाया च कोपोकाः ॥ 58 ॥

एवं सर्वे प्राणभूत: संयोगारसिका भृगम् ।

अप्राप्तभोगाविषया च यान्ये कतत नगः ॥ 59 ॥

Drenched with this sentiment, Vishnu lives with Kamalā; Brahmā, the four-faced, lives with Śāvitrī; Indra with Śacī and Śaṅkara resides with his wife Umā. The tree stands with creepers surrounding it, the deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon lives with the female pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to this sentiment of remaining in couples.

भवन्ति यतयते वे मुका देवेन वक्षिताः ।

असंसाररसत्राते वक्षिता वज्चनापरेः ॥ 60 ॥

Those who cannot enjoy owing to certain disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such enjoyments.

मधुरतालपितुर्णे ततः शान्तितरें है ते ।

क्व तातं क्व च वैरायं वर्तमाने मनोभये ॥ 6 ॥ ॥

Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples, they are deprived of it by the sweet

Book V Chapter XXVIII

juggler of words of the cheat and yet attached to the Peace sentiment.

तोपे कोटोच व तुर्धर्ष मोहे सति विनाशके ।

तस्माचमपि कल्याणि कुरक कानतं मनोहारूम ॥ 62 ॥

गुध्मं सुराणों जेतातं निर्गुध्मं चा महाजतम् ।

When delusion, the destroyer of Buddhi, the common sense, when the violent indomitable anger, greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge and dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the beautiful Sumbha or the powerful Niśumbha."

व्यास उवाच

इन्युक्चा रक्तबीजोर्सी विरास मुःश्रितः ॥ 6 3 ॥

श्रुत्वा जहास चामुखा कार्षिका चाधिक्का तथा ।

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पड्यकस्क्ये

सप्तिश्रेणीअवयः ॥ 27 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When Raktabīja spoke all these words, standing before the Devi Kalikā, Ambikā and Cāmuṇda began to laugh.

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the war of Raktabīja in Srimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVIII

On the Devi's Fighting

व्यास उवाच

कृत्वा हास्यं ततो देवी तमुवाच विश्यांपते ।

मेघाभ्यामीरा वाचा युक्तिपुर्णमिदं वचः ॥ १ ॥

पूर्वमेव मवा प्रोक्ते मन्दात्मार्कि विकलध्यसे ।

दूतस्यो यथायोगं वचनं हितसंयुतम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devi, hearing thus, laughed and spoke the following reasonable words, in a voice deep as a rumbling cloud: "O Dull brained one! Already I told to that messenger before in reply to you; why then do you boast in vain?

सदृगो मम रूपेण बलेन विषवेन च ।

त्रितोक्यां यदि कोउपि स्यानं पर्ति प्रयुणोभ्यम् ॥ ३ ॥

If there be any such in the three worlds who can stand equal to Me in appearance, strength, and prosperity, I will marry him.

ब्रहि शुभ्यं निशुभ्यं च प्रतित्रा मे पुरा कृता ।

तस्मातुद्रव तिथा मां विहाई विप्रित्वलुक ॥ 4 ॥

Go to Sumbha and Niśumbha and inform them that thus I promised before; therefore let any of them conquer Me in battle and then marry Me according to the prescribed rules.

तं वै तदात्राया प्राप्तस्तस्य कार्यांविसिद्धये ।

संग्रामं कुक पातालं गच्छ वा पतिना सह ॥ 5 ॥

You have come here to execute the order of Śumbha; so either stand up and fight or fly to Pātala with your King.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं देया: स दैत्योउमर्षपूरितः ।

मुभोच तरसा बाणान्सिद्वल्योपरि दारुणान् ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the Devi's words, the Dānava was filled with anger and began to shoot dreadful arrows at once on the lion.

अधिका ताउछानीवीक्ष्य गमाने प्रजोगोपाम्न ।

चिच्छेद सायकैस्तीक्ष्मौनैवुड्स्तनाव क्षणात् ॥ 7 ॥

Ambikā, then, ready-handed, seeing the multitude of arrows coming in the sky like serpents, cut them off in a moment to pieces by Her sharp arrows.

अर्थैर्जयान विशिष्टे रक्तबीजं महातुर्मुम् ।

अधिका चारभिनुर्फै: कर्णाङ्टैः शिलाशिति: ॥ 8 ॥

The Devi, then, drawing Her bow, shot arrows sharpened on stone at the great Asura Raktabija.

देवीबाणघतः पायो भूछ्ठीमाय एथोपरि ।

पत्तिते रक्तबीजे तु हाहाकारो महानभूत् ॥ 9 ॥

Then that wicked Demon, thus shot at by the arrows, fell unconscious on the chariot. When he lay thus senseless, a great uproar arose amidst his army and the soldiers began to cry aloud saying "Alas! We all are killed."

सैनिकाशुकुगुः सर्वे हताः स्म इति चावुवन् ।

ततो बुबारवं शुत्वा शुम्भः परमदातगणम् ॥ 10 ॥

उद्योगं सर्वैसैन्यानां दैत्यानामादिदेश है ।

Then Šumbha, the king of the Asuras, hearing the sound of Boombā (a danger cry by hands and mouth) ordered all the Dānavas to be ready for the battle.

यृष्म उवाच

निवान्तु दानावा: सर्वे कांबोजा स्वबलैवृता:। 11 1 ॥

अन्येध्यातिकावः शृगः कालकेवा विशेषतः ।

Then Šumbha said: “Let all Kāmbojas* go to the battle with all their forces; let other powerful heroes, especially the Kālakeyas, too, who are very strong heroes, go up for the battle.

Note: Kamboja, name of a people and their country. They inhabited the Hindukusā mountain which separates the Giljit valley from Balkh, and probably extended upto little. Tibet and Ladakh. The Kālakeyas may be the Afridis.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याजदां बलं सर्वे रुष्मेचन च घतुलीर्वम् ॥ 12 ॥

निर्जीगम मद्यादिष्ट देवी समरमण्डले ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered, all the fourfold army of Sumbha, viz., cavalry, infantry, elephants and chariots, went out, intoxicated for war, to the battle ground where the Devi existed.

तमागतं समालोक्य चधिडका दानवं बलम् ॥ 13 ॥

घण्टनादं चकाराणु भीषणं भयंदं मुड़ुः ।

The Devi Çandikā, seeing the Dānava forces coming near, made at once terrible sounds frequently.

ज्यास्वनं गढ़ुनादं च चकार जगद्विष्का ॥ 14 ॥

नेन नादेन सा जाता काली विस्तारितानना ।

The Ambikā Devi also made the sound with Her bowstring and blew Her conchshell. Kālī, then, shouted aloud opening Her mouth widely.

शुत्वा तिभिनंदो घोर सिंहो देल्याश्र वाहनम् ॥ 15 ॥

ज्ञानं सोउपि बलवाझ्ञनयभ्यमद्धुतम् ।

The powerful Lion, the Devi's Vāhana, hearing the terrible sounds, roared so loudly that the Dānavas were struck with strange terror.

तत्रिनादमुपश्रुच्य दानवा: क्रोधमूर्हिता: ॥ 16 ॥

सर्वे चिश्रिपुरस्त्राणि देर्वीं प्रति महावासतः ।

The powerful Dānavas, then, hearing that sound became impatient with anger and shot arrows after arrows on the Devi.

तस्मिनेवायते युद्धे टारुणे लोमड़र्णे ॥ 17 ॥

बहाद्यीनां च वेदानां गन्धाक्षीष्टिकां ययुः ।

The wonderful horrible battle, then, ensued, causing horripilation and the Śaktis of Brahmā and the other Devas began to come to Caṇdikā Devī.

यस्य देवस्य यदूर्य यथा भूषणवाहनम् ॥ 18 ॥

तादुपूरसदा देख्न: प्रययुः समराजूणे ।

The Devīs, the wives of the several Devas, then went, to the battle-field in their respective forms with ornaments and Vāhanas as generally on such occasions.

बहाणी वराटक्वा साक्षसूकमण्डलुः ॥ 19 ॥

अगगता बहाणा: शनिकन्द्रवाणीति प्रतिश्छिता ।

The Śakti (wife) of Brahmā named Brahmānī, mounting on the back of Her Swan came there with a string of beads and Kamandalu (a wooden waterpot used by ascetics).

वैष्णी गरुकाड़ा शुबुचक्रान्धरा ॥ 20 ॥

पचहस्ता समायात पीतावर्गविष्यिता ।

The Vaṣṇavī with Her yellow robes came there mounted on Garudā (the sacred bird of Viṣṇu, the carrier of Him) with conch, discus, club, and lotus in Her hands.

शाङ्गरी तु वृष्णकाठा निरुणलवधारिणी ॥ 21 ॥

अधिन्द्रप्राय देवी तथार्हिवलया शिका ।

The Devi Śaṅkari, the wife of Śiva, the Auspicious One, arrived on the back of Her Bull. The emblem of half-moon was on Her forehead while in Her hands She held snake, bracelet, and trident (Triśūla) and the sign of fearlessness for Her devotees.

कौभागी शिकाससंरका शफिरूस्ता वरान्ना ॥ 22 ॥

यूद्धकामा समयाता कार्तिकेयस्वलिधेण ।

The beautiful wife of Kártika, Kaumārī Devī,

Book V Chapter XXVIII

looking like Kärtika, came to fight there mounted on a peacock.

इन्द्रगी सुसुवदना सुश्रेतगजाछ्ना ॥ 23 ॥

वज्डस्तास्तिरोगबखा संग्रामिभूगुंची ययी ।

The fairfaced Indrānī, decked with ornaments on Her several limbs, came there to fight, with thunderbolt in Her hand, mounted on the elephant Airāvata.

वाराही सुकराकारा प्रौढ़ोतासना मता ॥ 24 ॥

नारसिंही नृसिंहस्य विष्नती सुर्गं वपुः ।

The Vārāhi Devi looking like a female boar, came also, seated on an elevated seat of departed souls (Preta). The Nārasinhi, resembling Nṛsirīha (the Man-Lion Incarnation) came there.

भाया च महिषाङ्ठा दण्डहन्ता भयप्रदा ॥ 25 ॥

सभ्यातात्य संग्रामे यमस्पा गृचिविस्ता ।

The wife of Yama, looking fearful like Yama arrived there on the battle-field smiling and with staff in Her hand and mounted on the back of a buffalo.

तर्वेय वाक्णी गस्ति: कौवेरी च मदोल्कटा ॥ 26 ॥

एर्वेशियालयाकाया ययु: स्वस्ववर्षैईता ।

Thus the wives of Kubera, Varuna, and other Devas came there with proper forms, Vahanas, ornaments, accompanied by their forces and all excited.

आगतातला: समालोक्य देवी मुदमवाप च ॥ 27 ॥

स्वस्था मुप्रदेरे देवा दैत्याक्ष भयमाययुः ।

ताथि: परिवृतसत्र ऋष्टो लोकशुक: ॥ 28 ॥

समागत्व च संग्रामे चधिडकामित्युवारा है ।

हन्यन्तामुर्ग: शीर्घे देवानां कार्यसिद्धये ॥ 29 ॥

निरुभधे वैद्युभचे च ये चान्ये दानवा: स्थितः।

Seeing them all, the Devi Ambikā became glad; the Devas, too, became peaceful and expressed their great joy the Dānavas were afraid at the sight of them, Śaṅkara, auspicious to all the beings, came there to the battle-field, surrounded by these goddesses and thus said to Capdikā: “Slay quickly all these Asuras, Śumbha, Niśumbha and all other Dānavas to serve the cause of the Devas.

हत्वा देत्यबलं सर्व कृत्वा च निर्भयं जगत् ॥ 30 ॥

स्वानि स्वानि च चिष्याप्नि समापच्छुं जनकः ।

Let all the goddesses destroy the Dānava race and thus free the world from dangers; they may, then, return to their own abodes.

देवा यजभुज: सन्तु ब्राह्मण यजने रतः ॥ 31 ॥

प्राणिनः सन्तु सन्तुतः सर्वे स्वावरजनाः ।

Let the Devas get their shares of sacrifices, let the Brāhmaṇas perform the sacrificial acts, and let all the creatures, moving or not moving, be happy.

गर्भ यान्तु तथोल्पात ईत्थक्ष तथा पुनः ॥ 32 ॥

यना: काले प्रवर्धन्तु कृधिवढ़मूला तथा ।

Let all calamities such as proceed from drought, excessive rain, rats, foreign invasion, locusts and birds, bats, etc., come to an end. Let the clouds bestow rains regularly and let the cultivation yield ample harvests. Note here that rats bring in plague."

व्यास उवाच

एवं बुवति देवेगे शड़हे लोकशड़हे ॥ 133 ॥

चिडकाया: शरीगतु निर्मात शक्तिच्छुता ।

भीषणाउतिषुचछा च शिवास्ताननितिदि ॥ 34 ॥

घोरकाणशय पडास्यमित्युवाच सिमतानना ।

Vyāsa said: O King! When Śaṅkara, the Lord of the gods and Auspicious to all, said thus, a wonderful female ensued out of the body of Candikā, very furious, horrible, with hundreds of jackals surrounding and yelling; then that Śakti of dreadful appearance, said to Śiva, smiling:

देवदेव द्वजायु एवं दैत्यनामियं प्रति ॥ 35 ॥

दूतत्वं कुरु कामारे बृहि सुभ्यं समत्कुलम् ।

निरुभयं च महोत्सवं चवनामम शक्र ३ १ ३ ६ ॥

मुक्चा त्रिविष्ट्यं यात यूयं पातालमागुं चै ।

O Deva of the Devas! Go quickly to the lord of the Daityas; do the duty of a messenger for us, O Destroyer of lust! O Śānkara! Tell that haughty Iustful Śumbha and Niśumbha to leave the Heavens and go to Pātāla.

देवा: स्वर्गे सुसंयातु तुगाष्ट् स्वासनं गुभम् ॥ 37 ॥

तपन्ति विविद्वे स्थानं यद्भागांश्र देवता: ।

जीवितेच्छा च युभाकं यदि ययानु महत्ता ॥ 38 ॥

तहिं गच्छत पाताल तरसा यत्र दानवाः ।

Let the Devas reign in the Heavens; Indra go to his own beautiful throne; let all the Devas go to their appropriate places in Heaven and receive their sacrificial offerings duly. And if the Demons desire to live, let them go quickly to the city of Pātāla where other Dānavas are dwelling.

अथवा बतनास्थाय युद्धेच्छा मरणाय चेत ॥ 39 ॥

तदा.उगच्छनु रुवन्यु मधिच्वा: विशितेन वः ।

Else, if they like to die, let them go quickly come to the battle-field and let their flesh be eaten up by Her jackals.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छ्वा वचने तथा शूलपाणिर्वल्यापिताः ॥ 40 ॥

गत्वाउं दैत्यजानं शुभ्मं सदस संस्थितम् ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing Her words, Sūlapāni went quickly to Sumbha, the lord of the Dānavas, seated in the assembly, and said thus:

शिव उवाच

राजन्नृतींहर्मंबायासिपुर्जपत्नकारो हर: ॥ 4 1 ॥

स्वलसकाशमिहायाते हितं कर्तुं त्वाविडलम् ।

त्वल्बा सर्ग तथा घूमिं यूयं गच्छत सलवम् ॥ 4 2 ॥

याताले यत्र प्रक्रादो बलिश्छ खलिनां बरः ।

अथवा मरणेच्छा चेनह्रागच्छत सलवम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

संग्रामे को हनिष्यामि सर्वनिवाहमागुः वै ।

इत्युवाच महात्रजी युष्याकल्याणहतेव ॥ 44 ॥

"O king! I am Hara, the Destroyer of the Asura Tripura; now I have come to you for your good as a messenger of Ambikā Devī. Quit the Heavens and Earth and go quickly to Pātāla where reside the powerful Bali and Prahlāda, or if you like to court Death, come to fight; I will slay you all in a moment. O king! The Great Queen Ambikā Devī has sent me with these instructions for your welfare and information."

व्यास उवाच

इति दैत्यवरान्देवी वाक्यममुत्स्त्रकिंपम् ।

हितकृष्णव्यवित्या स प्रत्यवातश्छ शूलभृत् ॥ 45 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus conveying the nectar-like, beneficial words of the Devi to the chief Daityas, Śiva, the Holder of the trident, returned to his own place.

यवाउसौ प्रेरितः शम्भूर्तन्चे दानवान्यप्रति ।

शिववृतीति विद्यताना जाता विभुवनेत्रखले ॥ 46 ॥

The Śakti that sent Śambhu as a messenger to the Dānavas is known in three worlds as Śiva Dūti. तेजी क्षुवा वचो देखाः शकुंगेनें तु उक्रमः ।

युद्धाय निर्वयुः शीर्धे दंशिताः शाखणायाः ॥ 47 ॥

The Daityas, thus hearing the rigorous words of the Devi, put on their coats of armour and taking their bows and arrows quickly went out to fight.

ततसा रणागान्य चधिछकां ग्रात दानावाः ।

निजन्धुघ शरैसतीधैः: कर्णकुँधै: शिलापिति: ॥ 48 ॥

They came with great force to the battle field, stretched their bows to their ears and shot piercing arrows, sharpened on stone and tipped with iron, at the Caṇḍikā Devi.

कालिकामुपलितन्तून गदाशक्तिविद्यारितान् ।

कुर्वीतुं व्यचरत्त्र भक्षयन्ती च दान्यान् ॥ 49 ॥

The Kālika Devi, too began to strike some with the trident, some with Śakti weapons, and some with clubs and rent them asunder and devoured them all, and began to roam in the field.

कमपडतुलनाधेपनताणान् महावलान् ।

ब्रह्माणीं चाकोत्तित्र दानवान्यमरांगणे ॥ ५० ॥

Brahmānī began to pour water from Her Kamandalu on the powerful Dānavas in the battlefield and thus destroyed them.

माहेश्वी वृबाहस्त दिशूलेनारितरंस्ता ।

जशन दानवासंख्ये पातयामास भूतते ॥ ५१ ॥

Māheśvari, mounting on Her Bull gave violent blows by Her trident and thus lay them dead on the ground.

वैथावी चक्रपातेन गदाधातेन दानवान् ।

गतप्राणांशकागयु चोतमांगविवर्जित् ॥ 52 ॥

Book V Chapter XXIX

Vaisņavi, with the blow of Her club, took away the lives of many Daityas and striking them with Her Discus cut off the heads of several others.

पैरीविप्रभूरोग पातयामास भूतले ।

रेशालकरायातपीक्षितान्दैत्यपुगवान् ॥ 53 ॥

Indrānī hurled Her thunderbolt on the chief Dānavas, already struck by the feet of the elephant and lay them dead on the field.

वाराष्टीतुपड्योतेन दंद्याप्रापतेनेच च ।

जयान कोधयंसुक्ता शतशो देह्वदावन्त्य ॥ 54 ॥

Vārāhi, angrily killed thousands of Daityas with her sharp teeth and trunk.

तारसिंही नखैसौदीर्वेरितान्दैत्यपुंगवान् ।

प्रश्यन्ती चचाराजी ननाद च मुडुबुईः ॥ 55 ॥

Nārasinhi tore the strongest Dānavas with the sharp nails and, devouring them, walked to and fro and made dreadful sounds.

शिवदूतीं सगुहासं पातयामास भूतले ।

नोंख्यादाय वाणुका कालिका च त्वर्यात्मा ॥ 56 ॥

Śiva Dūti began to laugh hoarsely and laid the Dānavas flat on the field, when they were atonce devoured by Kalikā and Candikā.

शिखसंस्या च कोमी काणंहुःः शिलाशिनः।

निज्ञान रंगे शत्रुदेवानां च हितार वे ॥ 57 ॥

Kaumārī, seated on a peacock, by drawing the bowstring to Her ears hurled arrows sharpened on stone on the enemies and killed them to serve the cause of the gods.

वाश्णीपाशसम्बद्धान्दैत्यान्समयमस्तके ।

पातयामास तत्पृष्टे भूर्द्धितानातवेतनान् ॥ 58 ॥

एवं मातृगणेनाजातिर्वीर्यपराक्रमम् ।

मदितं दानवं सैन्यं पलायनपरं हृषभूत् ॥ 59 ॥

Vārṇuī tied down the Dānavas by Her Pāśa weapons in a face to face fighting; thus they lay down senseless on the ground. O King! Thus the Mātrkās, the goddesses, crushed the forces. Then the other powerful soldiers fled away terrified.

बुंबारबस्तु सुमहानभूतत्र बल्णवे ।

पुष्पबिहं तदा देवाश्रकुंदेव्या गणेशपरि ॥ 60 ॥

The “Boombā” danger cry rose then loudly; on the other hand, the Devas began to shower flowers on the Devís.

तच्छ्वा निवन्दे घोरं जयगब्द च दानावाः ।

रक्त्वीजशुकोपाणु इव्हा दैत्यान्यतायितान् ॥ 61 ॥

Hearing the distressful agonies of the Asuras and the shouts of victory of the Devas, Raktabīja, the chief of the Dānavas became very angry.

गर्जमान्तिस्वा देेवान्बीक्ष्व दैत्यो महाकलः ।

त्क्तीजसु तेजस्वी राणाभ्याययी ताद ॥ 6 2 ॥

Seeing specially the Dānavas flying away and the Devas shouting, that powerful Demon came hurriedly to the battle-field in anger.

सावुधी रक्षसिंहिः: कुर्वेक्राणास्वधदुतम् ।

उजाजगाम तदा देर्वीं क्रोधरनैक्षणीघातः ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे

पद्रभकन्देगेडणिविंगोअधाय: 11 28 11

Then with eyes reddened with anger, and with various weapons came before the Devi, Raktabija mounting on a chariot, and making sounds unusual with his bowstring.

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the description of the fighting of the

goddesses in Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam the Mahā

Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXIX

CHAPTER XXIX

On the Killing of Raktabija

यास उचाच

वरदानिभंदं तस्य दानवस्य शिवार्थितम् ।

अत्यब्धुततरं राज्यबुणु ततप्रबंधीयह्म् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Please hear attentively about the extraordinary boon that was given by

Mahādeva, the God of gods, to the great warrior Raktabhja.

तस्य देहात्कर्विदुर्घदा पतति भूतते ।

सभ्यतन्ति दैत्यास्तदुपास्ततयात्राकमा: ॥ 2 ॥

असंख्याता महावीर्यां दानवा रक्तस्म्यवा: ।

प्रभर्विविति क्रंण दानोउसत्यबढ़तो वर: ॥ ३ ॥

Whenever a drop of blood from the body of that great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately will arise innumerable Dānavas, equal in form and power to him; thus the Deva Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon.

स तेन वरादानेन दर्पितः क्रोधसंयुतः ।

अध्यमानातसा संखले हन्तु देवीं सकालिकाम् ॥ 4 ॥

Thus elated with the boon, he entered into the battle-field with great force in order to kill Kālika with Ambikā Devi.

स दूर्वा वैषाणीं शक्ति गरुकीपरि संश्विताम् ।

गल्क्या जघान दैश्येन्द्रस्तां वै कमललोचनाम् ॥ 5 ॥

Seeing the Vaisṇavi Śakti, lotus-eyed seated on the bird Garuda, the Demon struck Her with a violent weapon (named Śakti).

गद्या वारयामास गर्फिकः सा शफिरसंयुता ।

आतडयच्च चक्रेण रक्तबीजं महापुरम् ॥ 6 ॥

She then baffled the weapon by Her club and hurled Sudarśana disc on the great Asura Raktabīja.

रधागतदेहानु बहु सुसाव शोणितम् ।

वज्राहतिरिः: श्रृगाधिरांरा इव गैरिका: ॥ 7 ॥

Thus struck by the disc, blood began to ooze out from his body as the red stream of soft red sandstone comes out of a mountain-top.

यत्र यत्र यदा भूमौ पतत्ति तर्कविद्वः ।

समुतस्थुस्तदाकारः पुरुषाश्र सहस्रशः ॥ 8 ॥

Wherever on the surface of the earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and there sprang out thousands and thousands of demons like him.

ऐ.झी तमसुं घोरं घजेशाणिबजघन च ।

रत्कबीजं कृधारिखा नि:ससार च शोगिणा ॥ 9 ॥

Indrāni, the wife of Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible Raktabīja with his thunderbolt.

ततस्तल्लजाज्ञाता रत्कीजा हानेकशः ।

तद्वीयोर्षच तदाकारा: सायुधा युद्धुदर्भेदः ॥ 10 ॥

Streams of blood then began to ooze out form his body. No sooner the drops of blood fell from the Demon's body, than were instantaneously born from the blood many powerful Asuras, of similar forms, having weapons and hard to be conquered in battle.

बह्वाणी बह्वायईन कृपिता हहनदभूभूम ।

माहेश्री त्रिगूलेने दाययामास दानवम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Brahmānī then becoming enraged stuck at him with the staff of Brahmā with greater force. Mahesvarī rent the Dānava asunder by striking him with Her trident.

नारसिंही नखाघातैरत विद्याथ महासुरम् ।

अहन्नुपडयातेन कुंद्रा तं गछासाधम् ॥ 12 ॥

कौभारी च त्वा शक्यता वसुस्येनमताडयत् ।

सोप्रि कुब्दः शगसारित्विंभेद निजीर्शेतु ता: ॥ 13 ॥

गदाशक्तिग्रहरितु मानु: सर्वो: पृथवसुयक् ।

शक्तयवं तशयातेर्विथ्युस्तत्यकोपितः ॥ 14 ॥

Nārasinjhi pierced the Asura with Her nails; Vārāhī struck at him with Her teeth. Then the Dānava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened arrows and pierced them all. Thus when the Mātrkā Devīs were pierced by the club and other various weapons of that great Asura, they got very angry and pierced the Dānavas in return with shots of arrows. Kaumārī, too, struck at his breast with Her weapon, named Śakti. The Dānava then got angry and hurled on them multitude of arrows and began to pierce them.

तस्य सश्वाणि चित्रद्रेच चधिडका स्वशैर: जितः ।

जवानान्यैक्ष विशिष्ठेयं देवी कुविता भुगणम् ॥ 15 ॥

O King! The Caṇḍika Devi, getting angry, cut off his weapons into pieces and shot violently at him other arrows.

तस्व देहाच्च सुसाव कधिर बहुधा तु यत् ।

तस्मात्तस्वरुगाः शूरा: प्रगुतासन्सहस्वः ॥ १ ६ ॥

O King! Thus struck by severe blows, when blood began to flow in profuser quantities from his body, thousands and thousands of Dānavas resembling Raktabijā sprang out instantly from it.

Book V Chapter XXIX

रत्कबीजैर्गेब्ज्ञापतं द्वितीयसमुद्धेः ।

सत्रादै: सायुधैः कामं कुर्वैद्धरुद्धमद्धुन् ॥ 17 ॥

So much so, that the heavens were all covered over with Raktabijtas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with weapons in their hands.

प्रहरंतक्ष तान्ट्यहा रक्तबीजान्नेकशः ।

यथभीतः सुगतेसंविधणणा: शोककर्षितः ॥ 18 ॥

Then the Devas, seeing that innumerable Raktabijas were striking the Devi, became very much frightened and were distressed with sorrow.

कंयमदा क्षयं दैत्या गमिध्यन्ति सहस्रणः ।

महाकाया महावीयीं दानवा तक्सम्बवाः ॥ 19 ॥

They began to talk with each other with sorrowful countenances that thousands and thousands of huge bodied warriors were springing from the blood. These were all very powerful; so how could they be destroyed!

एकैय चौड़काउग्रानित तथा काली च माततः ।

तृगाभिर्वानतः संबैं जेतलाः कटभेव तत् ॥ 20 ॥

In this battle-field there were now left only the Mātrikās, Kālikā, and Caṇḍikā. It would be certainly extremely difficult for them to conquer all these Dānavas.

निरूपभो वारश रूपभो वा सहसा बनसंकृतः ।

आगामधिति संग्रामे ततोउनर्थ महान्यचेत् ॥ 21 ॥

And if at that moment, Sumbha and Niśumbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great catastrophe would occur.

व्यास उवाच

एवं देवा भयोद्विनाड़ितातामापुर्महन्ताम।

यदा तदाधिक्वां प्राक काली कमललोचनाम ॥ 22 ॥

वायण्डे कृक विस्तीर्णे वदर्थे वलिता भृम्गे ।

मच्छसपातस्मघृतं कर्धिरं पिब सत्वा ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the Devas were thus extremely anxious, out of terror, Ambikā Devi said to the lotus-eyed Kālī: “O Cāmuṇḍā! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike

Raktabija with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it runs out of his body.

भक्षयन्ती चर रणे दानवानघ कामतः ।

ह्निथ्वायि शरैस्तीक्षौर्णद्विसमुसलैस्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

Instantly I will kill those Dānavas sprung form the blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Mūsalas; and you would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, roam in this field as you like.

तथा कुरु विशालाश्रि यान तद्धिपरस्य च ।

बिदुर्मारं यथा भूयां न पतेदीप सम्पतन् ॥ 25 ॥

O Large-eyed One! You would drink off all the jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and falls on the ground.

भक्ष्यमाणास्तद दैत्य व नोचल्यन्ति चापरे ।

एवमेभां क्षयो नूनं भविष्यति न चान्यथा ॥ 26 ॥

And then when they will all be devoured, no more Dānavas would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be extirpated; otherwise they will never be destroyed.

घातयिष्याम्यं दैत्यं लयं भक्षय च सत्वरा ।

विचन्ती क्षततं सर्वे चत्मानानर्शिसंक्षये ॥ 27 ॥

Let me begin to strike blows after blows on Raktabija and you better drink off quickly all the blood, being intent on destroying the forces.

इत्यं दैत्यमयं कृत्वा दत्ता राज्यं सुरातयम् ।

इज्ञाय सुसिंत्यं सर्वे गायिष्यायो यथासुखम् ॥ 28 ॥

O Cāmunḍaī Thus, the Dānavas being all exterminated, we will hand over to the Indra, the lord of the Devas, his Heavens without any enemy; and, thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own places.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ताप्रिक्वया देवी चामुपडा चण्डविक्रम।

पपी च हातर्ज सर्वे रक्तवीज्ञगरीरजम् ॥ 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Cāmunā Devī, of furious strength, hearing thus the Devi's words began to drink the jets of blood coming out of the body of Raktabija.

अधिका ते जयानागु खडूगेन मुस्लेन च ।

चखाद देशगकलांशुपुखा तान्कूगेशेरी ॥ 30 ॥

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

The Devi Ambikā began to cut the Demon's body into pieces and Cāmuṇḍā, of thin belly, went on devouring them.

सोरी कुब्द्री यद्याश्रीमुपुर्भां सम्पातयन् ।

तथापि सो परवायुः झलर्न तमपश्वसन् ॥ 31 ॥

Then Raktabīja, becoming angry, struck Cāmuṇḍā with her club. But though She was thus hurt severely, She drank off the blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof.

येऊ्ये कदिरवा: कूरा तर्फजीया महावलाः ।

तेपि निष्पातिताः सर्वे भक्षिता गतशोणिताः ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Thus Kālīkā Devi drank off the blood of all other powerful wicked Dānava Raktabīja that sprang out of the blood. Ambikā thus destroyed them.

कृत्रिमा भक्षिताः सर्वे सत्य स्थापाविकोसुरः ।

सोर्पि प्रपातितो हत्या खड्योनातिविखणिताः ॥ 33 ॥

रक्तबीजे हते रौद्र ये चान्ये दानवा रणे ।

पलायनं ततः कृत्वा गतातसे भयकमित्या: ॥ 34 ॥

Thus, all the Dānavas, created out of the blood were devoured; then, there was left, lastly, the real Raktabīja Ambikā Devi then cut him asunder into pieces by Her exe and thus killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabīja was slain in the battle, the Dānavas fled away trembling with fear.

हाहिति विबुवंतसे रुभ्यं प्रोचुः सुविहृतः ।

स्टिरात्कन्देश्व श्वितानखा विवेलसः ॥ 35 ॥

Without any weapons, covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of consciousness they uttered dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has happened, what has happened.”

राजत्रविक्वा रक्तक्रीजोसी विनिपातितः ।

वापुपडा तस्य देहानु घपी सर्वे न गोशिताम् ॥ 36 ॥

Thus crying, they told their King Śumbha thus: "O King of Kings! Ambikā Devi has killed Raktabīja and Cāmuṇḍā has drunk off all their blood.

ये चान्ये दानवाः शूरा वाहनेनातिरेहास ।

सिंहेन नित्रतः सर्वे काल्या च भक्षिताः परे ॥ 37 ॥

The carrier (Vāhana) of Devi, the powerful

ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and Kālī devoured the remaining soldiers.

वयं त्वां कथितुं राजजगता युद्धरेषितम् ।

चारितं च तथा देव्या: संगमे परमाद्धान् ॥ 38 ॥

O Lord of the Dānavas! We have fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to describe the wonderful doings of that Caṇḍikā Devi in the battle-field.

अजेवेयं महाराज सर्वथा देत्यन्दानेः ।

गन्धर्वसुग्यक्षेध उपगोरागसर्षे: ॥ ३ ९ ॥

O King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that Lady, be he a Daitya, Gandharva, Asura, Yakṣa, Pannaga, Cāraṇa, Rāksāsa, or an Uraga.

अन्यास्त्रियाना तेव्य इन्द्राणीप्रमुखा धृगम् ।

व्यध्याना महाराज वदिर्विपद्यैताः ॥ ४ ० ॥

O King of Kings! The other Goddesses, Indrānī and others, have come to the battle, on their own carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons.

ताथि: सर्व हृत सेन्यं दानवानां वरायुधैः ।

रक्तबीजोंपि राजेन्द्र तस्या दिविनपिततः ॥ 4 1 ॥

O Lord of the Dānavas! The Dānava forces are all slain by them with the excellent weapons in their hands. Even Raktabīja has been slain in no time.

एकाजपि दुःसहा देवी किं पुनस्ताधिर्यिता ।

सिंहोरिप हिन्द संग्रामे राक्षसान्यितमध्यः ॥ 42 ॥

That Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Rāksaṣas in the battle; The Devī alone is hard to conquer; how much more would it be impossible to conquer Her, when She has been joined with other goddesses.

अतो विचार्यं सचिवैर्विषुक्त नित्रधीयताम् ।

न वैरमवना युक्ते सन्धिरेव सुखप्रद: ॥ 43 ॥

So consult with the ministers and do what is reasonable. In our opinion it is better to make treaty with Her and quit your cinnity.

आध्रधीमेदतद्धिलं यवगी हन्न त्रास्तान् ।

रक्त्रीजोरिपि निहत: पौर्त तस्यापि शोगितिण् ॥ 44 ॥

Book V Chapter XXIX

O King! Think over the fact that Lady destroyed all the Dānavas and at last drank off the blood of Raktabīja and at last killed him.

अन्य निपातिता द्विण: संग्रामेप्रिक्वका नृप ।

चानुंदया च मांसं वै भवितं सकलं रणे ॥ 4 5 ॥

What on earth can be more wonderful than this? O King! The Devi Ambikā killed all the other Daityas and Cāmunḍā devoured their blood, flesh, and all.

वरं पातालगमनं तस्या: सेवा5थावा चरा ।

न तु युद्धं महाराज कार्यमंविकया सह ॥ 4 6 ॥

Considering all this, it is now better for us to serve the Devi Ambikā or fly away to Patāla. No more fighting is desirable.

न नारी प्राकृतता होया देकावार्यैसाधिनी ।

मार्येय प्रवला देरी क्षयन्तीयमुपचिता ॥ 47 ॥

She is not an ordinary woman; she is Mahā Māyā, there is not the least doubt in this. Only to serve the cause of the Gods, She has manifested Herself and is now destroying the Rāksasas' race.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचतल्यं श्रुचा कालविधोहितः ।

पुयुषुः प्रत्युवाचेदं शुचपः प्रसूक्रितात्पर: ॥ 48 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing thus, Śumbha got confounded by Kāla (Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, his lips quivering with anger.

शुभ्म उवाच

यूयं गच्छत पातालं शरणं वा भयातुतः ।

हनिष्यान्यहमदैय तां च तांश सपुवतः ॥ 49 ॥

"You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of Candikā or fly down to Pātāla; but I will kill Her with all my exertion and effort.

वित्ता सर्वानुसानाजी कृतावार्ज्यं सुयुकलम् ।

कथं नारीभदोघिनः पातालं प्रविश्याम्बून ॥ 50 ॥

I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have enjoyed their kingdoms; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and enter into the Pātāla.

निहत्य पार्वदानस्वान् रत्क्रीजमुखान् रणे ।

प्राणाजाणाय गच्छामि हिला किं विपुलं यशः ॥ 51 ॥

All my attendants, Raktabija and other heroes, are now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away out of the sake of preserving my life only.

मरणे त्विनिवार्ये श्राणिनां कालकल्पित्यम् ।

तद्यं जन्मोपोषन्तं त्यजेनको तुर्वर्णे यशः ॥ 52 ॥

See! The death of all the beings is ordained by Kāla and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is born, he is liable to the fear of death.

निरूपभर्ते गतिय्यामि यशाकडो रणातिरे ।

हत्वा तामागतिथ्यामि नागतिथ्यमि चान्यथा ॥ 53 ॥

How can a man, then, out of fear of death, quit all his name and fame? O Niśumbha! I will now go immediately to the battle, mounting on my chariot and will return after slaying Her in battle. त्वं तु सेनायुतो वीर पाणिण्याहो भवस्य मे ।

तरसा तां गरेस्तीक्षौर्निरीं नय यमालये ॥ 54 ॥

And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then return any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all your forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows.

निरुभ्म सजाच

अहमदा इनिष्यामी पाला दुर्धी च कालिकाम् ।

आगमिष्याम्बट शीर्घे गृहीला तामथीविकाम् ॥ 55 ॥

Nisūmbha said: "Today I will go to the battle and slaying that Kālīkā, will shortly return here with Ambikā.

मा चित्तां कुक राजेन्द्र वसाकायस्तु कारणे ।

क्वेषा बाला क्व मे बाहुर्वीर विश्वशंकाम् ॥ 56 ॥

O King! Do not think at all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that weak woman; there is a vast difference.

त्वक्वातिं विश्वां धानभूश्व योगानुभात्मान ।

आनयिष्यान्छे कामं मानिर्मी मानसंयुताम् ॥ 57 ॥

Cast aside your this great mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you.

मायि तिश्रित ते राजन युर्फे गमनं रणे ।

गत्वाड्मानयिष्यामि तवार्थे वै जयधियम् ॥ 58 ॥

O King! You ought not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory.

ध्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा भारतं ज्येषुं कनीयावलपहितः ।

रथाभास्थाय विपुलं सनझदः स्वबलावृतः ॥ 59 ॥

जगाम तस्मा तूर्णं संगरे कृतमंगलः ।

संस्तुतो बन्स्युतैंध सायुधः सपरिक्रतः ॥ 60 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभाग्यतो महापुराणो प्रह्मस्कन्धे

एकानोविशोर्धया: 11 29 || 1

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, proud of his own strength went hurriedly to the battle-field, mounting on his big chariot. He was protected all over is body his coat of armour and he was well provided with various weapons and all other accoutrements of war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and various other propitious ceremonies were being performed.

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth

Book on the killing of Raktabíja in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXX

On the Killing of Niśumbha

यास उवाच

निरूपभो निद्धयं कृत्वा मरणाय जयाय वा ।

सोहाम: सबल: शूरी रोणे देहीपुणयची ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus making a firm resolve that there would be either victory or death, the great warrior Niśumbha went to fight with the Devi, with great excitement and with all his forces.

नामाजाग सृष्मोर्धि स्वबलेन समावृतः ।

प्रेशकोंअप्रूर्णे राजा संग्रामसमपिडतः ॥ २ ॥

Šumbha, too the Lord of the Daityas, accompanied by his forces, went after Niśumbha; Šumbha knew full well the rules of warfare; therefore he remained a witness there.

नागने संस्थिता देयास्तदाउप्रभटलातूनः ।

दिदूक्ष्वस्तु संगमे सेन्द्रा यक्षनगातताः ॥ ३ ॥

Indra and the other Devas and Yakṣas, all stationed themselves in the celestial space, eager to see that fight, covered with clouds.

निरुभ्योद्ध रणे गत्या धनुराद्य शार्डैक्म ।

चकार शरबृष्टि स भीयवझगद्धिकम ।। ४ ॥

Nisūmbha came to the field, and, taking the strong bow made of horns, began to shoot arrow after arrows at the Divine Mother with the object of frightening Her.

मुब्जतं शरबालातिन सिगूभ्यं चधिडका राणे ।

वैश्यादाय धनु:श्रेडं जहास सुखरं गुड़ुः ॥ 5 ॥

Seeing Niśumbha with his excellent bow, shooting arrows, Candikā began to laugh frequently.

उवाच कालिका देवी पश्य मुत्बल्मेपतेयो: ।

मरणायगती कालि मत्समीयमिहाछ्ना ॥ 6 ॥

दूर्शा देत्यवधी घोरं रक्तबीजाययं तथा ।

जयागां कृतस्त्वेती मोहिती मम मायया ॥ 7 ॥

With a soft slow voice She spoke to Kalikā: "O Kāli! See their foolishness! They have come before me, courting death. They are so much deluded by My Māyā, that they yet expect victory when they have already witnessed the death of Raktabjā and many Dānavas.

आणा बलवती होना न जाहित नरं क्वचित् ।

भर्न हतं बलं नहं गतपक्षे चित्रनेनम् ॥ 8 ॥

आशापाशनिबद्धौ ही युद्धाय समुपगतो ।

निह्नल्यो मया कालि रणे शुभ्यनिरुभ्यकी ॥ 9 ॥

Hope is so very that it never quits a man. How wonderful is this that some of their armies are destroyed, some are wounded, some are rendered senseless, some made powerless, some have fled; seeing all these, yet, they have come to fight, as it were, fastened by the cord of hope of victory. O

Book V Chapter XXX

Kāli! Today I will certainly slay Niśumbha and Śumbha.

आसम्रमणावेति संप्राती देवभोहिती ।

पश्यतां सर्वदैवानां हनिष्याम्यमहम तो ॥ 10 ॥

Their death is nigh; deluded by the Daivi Maya, they have come to Me. Therefore, in the face of all the Devas, I will kill them to day.

व्यास उवाच

इतुसुक्वा कालिकां चण्डी कणाकृशगेतकरैः ।

छाव्यामास तस्या निशुभ्यं पुरतः स्थितम् ॥ 1 1 ॥

द्रानवोदी प्रशंसल्याधिछ्छेद्व निशितः शरैः ।

तयोः परस्यं युद्धं बध्वातिसंचायकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, and suddenly drawing Her bow, Candi covered Niśumbha, in front, all over with a multitude of arrows. Niśumbha, too, cut off those arrows into pieces by his sharp arrows; thus the fight became more and more dreadful between them.

कैसरी कैगलानिति धुवानः कैन्यसागम् ।

गह्यामास बलवान्सरर्गे वाणीय चथा ॥ 13 ॥

At this time, the lion of Bhagavati, came down upon the forces, quivering his manes, like a powerful elephant going down into a lake.

नरईदैन्तप्रहीरसु दानवान्युतः स्थितान् ।

चयाद च विशीणाईन्न गवानिव मोत्केवान् ॥ १४ ॥

By his nails and teeth, he tore asunder the bodies of the Dānavas that fell before him and devoured them, as if they were infatuated elephants.

एवं विद्यमयाने तु सैन्ये केसरीणा तव ।

अभ्यधाविज्ञाम्बो 5व कृष्टवराकामुकः ॥ 1 5 ॥

अन्येपि कृष्टा देलेन्द्रा देवी हनुपायवयुः ।

सन्द्धदानसना रक्तेना झनेकाः ॥ 16 ॥

That lion thus crushing down the soldiers, Nüsumbha came forward hurriedly, drawing his excellent bow. Hundreds of other generals of the Dānavas came up there to kill the Devi, biting their lips and with their eyes reddened with anger.

ततजगान तस्या गुष्पः सैन्यस्मापुतः ।

नित्य कालिकां कोपादुरुहीतुं जगदधिकवम् ॥ 17 ॥

In the meantime Śumbha killed Kālīkā and

came very hurriedly there with his forces to capture the Divine Mother.

तत्राग्य ददुराजावंविका च पुरःस्थिताम् ।

गैरससुतां कानतां श्रंगारससंयुताम् ॥ 18 ॥

Coming to the battle field Sumbha saw that the Divine Mother was standing before him; though She was looking very beautiful, fit for love sentiment, yet She was filled also with the sentiment of fiery wrath.

तां वीक्ष्य विमुतपाणीं शैतैकव्यसरुन्दीम् ।

सुरत्कनयं तस्यां ठोधोरात्क्षणां तथा ॥ १९ ॥

At that time the large eyes of Bhagavatī, the Beautiful in the three worlds, though naturally red, looked more red due to wrath.

विवाहेच्छो परित्यज्य जयाणां दूततस्तथा ।

मरणे निश्रयं कृत्वा तत्थावाहित्कामुईकः ॥ 20 ॥

When Śumbha saw Her lovely feature, the desire to marry Her and the hope of victory all vanished away from his mind; and he stood there with bow in his hand, firmly holding in his mind that he would die.

तं तथा दानवं देवी सिमन्तुर्धिंदः चवः ।

वधापे श्रुण्वतां तेषां द्वैत्यानां रणमस्तके ॥ 2 1 ॥

Seeing the Dānava in that state, She smiled and began to say, so that all the Dānavas could hear. गच्छधं पामता युंपालतां वा जलाणविम ।

जीतिज्ञां स्थितं कृता व्यक्तात्रजेवापुधानि च ॥ 2 2 ।

“O Wretched Fools! If you all want to live, quite all your weapons here, go to the Pātāla or to the middle of the ocean.

अथवा मच्छागतहतमुणा रणाशि ।

प्राय स्वर्गसुखं सर्वे क्रीईतु विनतज्ञतः ॥ 23 ॥

Or be slain in the battle by My arrows and go to heavens and enjoy there without any fear all the enjoyments and sports there.

काततरंचे च शूरत्वं न भववेय वरवंथा ।

द्वाद्यभयदानं वै यानु सर्वे यथासुपुखम् ॥ 24 ॥

Weakness and heroism, both cannot be expected at one and the same time and at the same individual; therefore I am ordering you to dispel

your fears. Now go wherever you find your ease and happiness.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्णं वचस्तस्यां नित्यमो मटगर्वितः ।

नित्रितं खद्गमादाय चर्मे चैवाहचन-ऋकम् ॥ 25 ॥

धावामान्तु तसास्त्रसिना सिंहं मदोक्कटम् ।

जयानातिवलान्मृदिन धाययझादिवक्षाम। 26 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of the Devi, that haughty Niśumbha ran forward, holding in his hand the sharpened axe and shield adorned with eight Candras (embossed) and firstly struck with sword violently on the proud lion; then, whirling with great force that sword, hurled it upon the Divine Mother.

ततो देवी खरवाद्या वंचवित्याउसिपातनम् ।

ताड्यामास तं बाहोभूले पर्युना तदा ॥ 27 ॥

The Devi, then, thwarted off the blow of the sword by Her club and struck at his arm by Paraśu.

खडेरोन निर्हत: सोडपि बाहुमूले महामदः ।

संलम्य वेदनां घुवो जाघान चोषड़का तदा ॥ 28 ॥

साउपि घणटावनं घोरे चकार घायदं नृणाम् ।

The warrior Niśumbha, thus struck at his arm, patiently bore that hurt and struck at Candikā by his axe. The Devi then made such a terrible noise of bells that all the Daityas were struck with terror.

परी पुनः पुनः पानं नियुर्णमं हनुनीच्छती ॥ 29 ॥

पूर्व परसरं युद्धं बभूवातिभप्रमुद्रम् ।

देवानां दानवानां च परस्पराजवीर्णम् ॥ 30 ॥

Then She, desiring to kill Niśumbha, began to drink nectar frequently. O King! Thus the terrible fight went on between the Devas and Dānavas both trying to defeat the other party.

पलादा: पक्षिणः कृतः सामेवाश्र जयकुाः ।

ननुशुशासित्नुशा गृधा: केनाका शयासः ॥ 31 ॥

राण्यपणिति भृथिष्यतितानुरवर्षकैः ।

कौरास्वावसंयुवर्तैर्गजाश्वेदेसंकुला ॥ 32 ॥

पतितान्दावनावन्दूखा निर्गुभ्योतिरुकाश्विततः ।

प्रयथी चणिकडा तृर्णबुद्याबाद्य द्रकाणाम ॥ 33 ॥

Then began to dance ir the battle-field, the cruel varacious dogs, jackals, vultures, herons, crows

and other birds, very much gladdened. The battlefield was drenched in blood and the dead carcasses of innumerable Dānavas, elephants, and horses were strewn around. Nisūmbha, then, seeing the Dānavas dead on the field, became very angry and ran forward with his terrible club before the Devi.

सिंहं जघान गटया मरतके मदगवितैः ।

प्रहृत्य च सितं कृत्वा पुनर्वैभिवाडवत् ॥ 34 ॥

सापि ते कुपिताऊतील निषुभं पुतः स्थितम् ।

प्रहन्तं समीक्षाय देवी वचनमवर्षित् ॥ 35 ॥

That proud Asura struck first at the head of the lion with that club and laughed again and again and struck the Devi with that same club. The Devi, too, got very angry seeing Niśumbha before Her and striking at Her. She then spoke thus:

देव्यवाच

सिट्ठ मंदमते ताव्हायावलड्वारमिदं तव ।

ग्रीवायां ग्रेरायाम्यसाद्र-तासिर यमसदनम् ॥ 36 ॥

O You Stupid! Wait till I sever your head from your body by this axe. Soon you will be sent unto death with your head severed off your body.

व्यास उचाच

इत्युक्चना तरसा देवी कृपाणेन समाहिता ।

चिच्छेद मस्तकं तस्य निजुम्भस्याच चिष्ठकां ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus saying, the Caṇḍikā Devī instantly cut off the head of Niśumbha by Her axe with great caution.

स हिजमस्तको देया कबन्धोर्जीव दारूण: ।

वधाम च गदापाणिशासयदेवतागणान् ॥ 38 ॥

The head thus severed from the body by the blow of the Devī, the headless Demon began to roam there with great force with club in his hand. The Devas then got very much frightened.

देवी तस्य त्रिरितांणीशिक्छेद्व चरणी करी ।

पपातोल्यात ततः पपी नातानुः पवर्तेनोपः ॥ ३९ ॥

The Devī, then, cut off the hands and feet of that headless Demon with sharpened arrows.

तत्मिभिपतिते दैतेः निर्गुभे भीभिविक्रोः ।

हाहाकारो महानासीतलै-वे भयकमीयते ॥ 40 ॥

Book V Chapter XXX

That vicious wretch fell down lifeless, on the ground like a mountain. The powerful Daityas Niśumbha being thus killed, a great uproar arose amidst his panic stricken forces.

व्यक्त्वासप्रधानि सर्वांगी सैनिका: क्षताज्यतुतः ।

जगयुर्धावरां सर्वे कुबीणा राजमन्त्रिय् ॥ 41 ॥

The soldiers, covered all over their bodies with blood, left all their weapons in the field, began to make Boombā sound (a piteous cry with mouth and hands as sign of danger) and fled away to the king Śumbha.

तानागतानुसंप्रेक्ष्य शुभ्यः शज्ञिपृद्व्नः ।

प्रच्छ क्व निशुमोजसी कवं भग्न: पलायिता: ॥ 4 2 1

He, the tormentor of the foes, then asked them coming: "Where is Niśumbha now? Why have you fled away from the field?"

तच्छुत्वा बचनं ग्रासते प्रोषुः प्रगता भ्रुगम् ।

राजसेन निद्रातो भाता शेते समस्यूर्दिन ॥ 4 3 ॥

Thus hearing the King's words, they bowed down and said: "O King! Your brother Niśumbha is lying dead on the battle-field.

तया निपातिता: शूगा ये च तेध्यज्ञानुगा: ।

वय त्वां कवितुं सर्वे वृत्तानं समुपगाता: ॥ 4 4 ॥

O King The Devi killed all the Dānava warriors that attended your brother; only we are left and have come here to give you the information.

निरुभामो निद्रास्तरस तथा चण्डिकवासुघान ।

न हि युद्धस्य कालो3घ तत राजजगंगोगे ॥ 4 5 ॥

O King! Niśumbha has been killed by the weapons of the Devi. So we think you ought not to go to the battle.

देवकार्य समुहिष्य कारपीय परमांगना ।

हन्तु देत्यकुलं नूनं प्रापतीत परित्थित्य ॥ 4 6 ॥

Know this as certain that the Lady, the Highest Cause of this Universe has come here to destroy the Dānavas, the object being to serve the cause of the Gods.

नैया प्राकृतयोषिव देवीशक्तिरन्तमा ।

अर्विव्यचरिता क्वापि दुर्जेया द्वैतरीपि ॥47 ॥

नानारूपधरातील मायामृत्यिशारत ।

विश्वभूषणा देवी सर्वायुधरा शुभा ॥ 48 ॥

This Lady is not an ordinary woman; She is the Supreme Force; Her doings are inconceivable; what more can be said than the fact that the Devas never can know Her! This Devi can assume various forms; She is the origin of Māyā; She is very clever; She is adorned with various ornaments and is holding various weapons in Her hands.

गह्ना गृहवर्ति कालरात्रिविपाया ।

अपारपारगा पूर्णी सर्वलक्षणसंयुता ॥ 49 ॥

Her doings are incomprehensible; She is like a Second Night of Dissolution (at the end of the world); She is Perfect, endowed with all auspicious signs, capable to go beyond the insurmountable.

अन्तर्रक्षित्या द्विवासी सुवंकृतुकोभावः ।

देवकार्य च कुवर्णी श्रीदेवी परमादुताम ॥ 50 ॥

This wonderful Devi is serving the cause of the gods and the Devas from the sky are singing hymns to Her.

पलायनं पोर धर्मः सर्वथा देहराक्षणम् ।

रक्षिते कित देशैस्म्य-कालो5स्मसुखताक्षते ॥ 51 ॥

O King! It is now your paramount duty to fly away and save your life; if you live, you may have the chance for gaining the victory when time will turn out favourable; there is no doubt in this.

संग्रामे विजयो राजन्यविता ते न संग्रतः ।

कालः कंपोत बलिनं समये निर्विवतं कवित् ॥ 52 ॥

It is Time that makes a strong man weak; and it is that very Time that makes that weak man strong again and stimulates him for victory.

तं पुनः सकलं कृत्वा जयायोपद्धाति हि ।

दातारं याचकं कालः करोति समये कवित् ॥ 53 ॥

भिश्छूकं धनदातारं करोति समयान्तरे ।

विषयु: कालवजो नृनं बढ़ा वा पर्वतीपति: ॥ 54 ॥

Time makes a generous donor a beggar and it is Time that makes the same beggar again a generous donor. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, Indra and other Devas are all under the sway of this Time; so Time is the Sovereign of all.

इन्हादा निजीरा: सर्वे काल एव प्रभु: स्वयम् ।

तस्माकालं प्रतीक्षस्य विपरीतं ततायुना ॥ 5 5 ॥

Therefore, O King! Wait for this Time. Now Time is favourable to the Gods and inimical to you.

सम्पुखो देवतानां च दैत्यानां नाशहेतुकः ।

एकैव च गतिनिति कालस्य किल भृपते ॥ 5 6 ॥

Therefore Time is destroying now the Daityas. But the course of Time is not the same throughout. O King! The actions of Time are various no doubt.

- नानास्पधाराध्यपति झात्म्यं तस्य चेषितम् ।

कदाचित्सभवो नृणां कदाचित्त्वलयतथा ॥ 57 ॥

Time creates men and Time destroys them. The time of creation is different from the time of destruction, this is evident to you before your eyes.

उत्पत्तिहुः कालोज्ञ्यः क्षयहुतुलसाधपः ।

प्रत्यक्षे ते महाराज देल्या: सर्वे सवासना: ॥ 58 ॥

करताले कृतः पूर्व कालेन समुद्धेन च ।

तेनैव विमुचेनाठ्य बलिनोजलवग्यसुराः ॥ 59 ॥

नित्ता नितरां कालः करोति च सुभागुभम् ।

न चात्र कारणं काली नैव देवा: सनातना: ॥ 60 ॥

See! When Time was favourable to you, you subjected Indra and all other Devas and made them pay taxes to you; and now Time is unfavourable to you; so an ordinary weak woman is killing the powerful Dānavas; Time, therefore, is doing favourable things and also unfavourable things.

The host of Devas or the woman Kālī is not the cause thereof.

यथा ते रोचते राजसंखा कुक विमुश्य च ।

कालोउं यान हैतुले दानवानां तथा पुनः ॥ 6 1 ॥

त्वद्याते गतः शको भपनः संख्ये निरगुधः ।

तथा विद्युस्तथा रुडो करणो धनदो यमः ॥ 6 2 ॥

O King! The present Time is not favourable to you and the Daityas; knowing this, do as you like. See! Indra, Viṣṇu, Varuna, Yama and other prominent Devas all fled before in battle, quitting their weapons.

तथा त्वमिप राजेन्द्र वीक्ष्य कालवर्गे जगत् ।

पातालं गच्छ तरसा जीवन्मुद्रमाव्यसि ॥ 63 ॥

मृते त्वयि महाराज शगवस्ते मुदाधिततः ।

मंगलानि प्रगायंती विचारिधानि सर्वतः ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्के

शिरोअधाय: 11 30 ॥

So, knowing this world as subject to the control of Time, you can now fly away and go quickly to the Pātāla. For if you live, you will get in future all the pleasures; and if you be killed, you enemies will all be very glad and roam everywhere fearlessly, singing propitious songs.

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Niśumbha in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam,

the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXI

On the Death of Šumbha

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः शुत्वा शुभ्यो दैत्यपतिस्तदा ।

उवाच सैनिकानाशु कोपाकृतिलतलोचनः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śumbha, the Lord of the Daityas, hearing the words of the soldiers, began to say, then, with eyes rolling with anger.

शुभ्म उवाच

जात्या: किं दूत तुवाँर्थे कृत्वा जीवितुयुले ।

नित्य सचिवाय्प्रात्रिलैंकजो विचारामि किम् ॥ 2 ॥

Śumbha said: "O Fools! What are you saying

all this? How can I do this unspeakably mean act and then hope to live? How shall I be able to roam in this world when I have become the cause in the slaying of my brothers and ministers?

कालः कर्ता शुभानो राजभुभानो बलवततः ।

का चित्ता मम दुवरि तस्मिहोगोउध्यकपके ॥ ३ ॥

Time is the more powerful cause of all that takes place, good or bad; so when this formless Time is the Supreme Ruler, what use is there in my brooding over the result?

Book V Chapter XXXI

यद्वयिति तद्वयत् यत्कोतिति करोतु तत् ।

न मे चिन्ताजसित कुजापि यमणाजीविनताया ॥ 4 ॥

Let whatever come that is inevitable, let whatever be done that is destined to take place; death or life, I do not think of either.

स कालोउपन्यथा कर्तु भावितो नेशते कवचित् ।

न कर्षिति च पर्नयः श्रावणे मासि सर्वदा ॥ 5 ॥

The more so when Time is never able, even when worshipped, to thwart off death or life when their proper moment arrives.

कदापिभागीर्णिरें वा पोरे माघेउध फालुने ।

अकाले वर्षतीवाशु तस्मामुख्यो न चास्तवम् ॥ 6 ॥

See! The God of rain gives up rain in the rainy season; but, it is seen that sometimes it does not rain in the month of Śrāvaṇa (the rainy season); whereas it rains sometimes in the month of Agrahāyaṇa, Pausa, Māgha, or Phālguṇa (not the rainy season).

कालो निमित्मात्रां तु दैवं हि बलवतस्म।

दैवेन निर्मितं सर्वे नान्यथा घबतीत्वः ॥ 7 ॥

Therefore it is evident that Time is not the chief factor. Fate is stronger than Time; Time is merely the instrumental cause.

दैवमेव परं मन्ये चित्यभीरमवर्गकम् ।

जेता यः सर्वदेवानां निर्याम्योउपन्यथा हतः ॥ 8 ॥

It is this Fate that has created all this universe; it cannot be rendered otherwise. I consider Fate as Supreme; Fie on this one's own exertion! For, Lo! Niśumbha, who had before conquered all the Devas, is slain today by an ordinary woman!

त्काबीजो महापुरः सोर्धि नागं गतो यदा ।

तदाई कौतिंमुचूज्य जीवितागां कोमीय किम् ॥ 9 ॥

Alas! When Raktabīja, too, had been slain, how can I desire to hold on to my life, foregoing all my name and fame!

प्राप्ते काले स्वयं बढ़ा पराध्रियसामिति ।

निधयं चाति तरसा जागक्तां स्वयं प्रभुः ॥ 10 ॥

Even Brahmā, who has created all this universe, will not sooner come to an end than his longevity expires.

चतुरुंपासहरं तु बढ़ाणो विद्ये किल ।

पतन्ति भवानतरंच नव चेज्ञतला युन: ॥ १ १ ॥

तथैव द्विगुणो विद्यूर्मराणायोपकल्पते ।

तथैव द्विगुणो काले शड़ूः शान्तिमेति च ॥ १ २ ॥

Four thousand Yugas constitute one day of Brahmā; and in that one day fourteen Indras perished; so twice the life of Brahmā constitute the life of Viṣnū; similarly twice the life period of Viṣnū constitutes the life period of Maheśa; and when their longevity expire, they come to an end.

का चित्ता मरणे मुहा निश्छले दैर्विनिति ।

मही महीधाराणां च नाशः सूर्यशगाङ्गवोः ॥ 13 ॥

This visible earth, mountains, sun and moon all will perish; so it has been specially ordained by the Destiny; therefore, O Fools! I do not care a bit for death.

जातस्य हि धुवं मृत्युधुवं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

अधुउेस्मिज्ञगीरे तु स्थणीयं यथा: स्थितम् ॥ 14 ॥

When a being is born, he must die; and when anyone dies, he will be born again, there is no doubt in this.

रथो मे कल्यन्ता शीर्भ गमिष्यामि रणाजिरः ।

जयो वा मरणं वारि भवत्वशैद वैतः ॥ 15 ॥

So one ought to preserve one's name and fame which is more permanent in this transitory body. Prepare my chariot; I will go today to the battlefield; let victory or defeat come as it may, as Fate has ordained. I will soon go to fight."

इत्युक्त्वा सैनिकाऊयुंपो यद्यमाध्यय सत्यतः ।

प्रयवादाधिक्वा यत्र संश्रिता तु हिमाभलने ॥ १ ६ ॥

Thus saying, Śumbha mounted on the chariot quickly and went where the Devi Ambika was staying. Then the four-fold army, cavalry, infantry, chariots, horses and elephants and innumerable soldiers, followed him with weapons in their hands.

सैन्य प्रचलितं तस्य संगे तत्र चतुविधम् ।

हल्पस्थायपादातिरमंयुतं सायुधं बड़ु ॥ 17 ॥

Going there to the Himalaya mountain, he saw the Divine Mother sitting on Her Lion. She

appeared so very lovely as to enchant the three worlds.

तत्र गलाड़चेल शुभ्मः संशितां जगद्धिककाम् ।

शैलैकवमोहीनी कान्तापय्यत्सिंह्वाहिनीम् ॥ 18 ॥

सर्वापरणभूषात्घां सर्वलक्षणासंरुताम् ।

स्तूयमातं सुरैः ख्वर्थीन्धर्वेयक्षिकरोः ॥ 19 ॥

Her body was decorated with various ornaments, all the auspicious gems were manifest; the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas and Kinnaras in the heavens were all worshipping Her with hymns and Pārijāta flowers, and the Devi was making beautiful sounds with bells and conches, indicative of Her victory.

पुर्थेध पूच्यमानां च मन्दारपादपोद्बरैः ।

कुर्णिणां गंखिनन्दे चफटनादं मनोहस्म् ॥ 20 ॥

दूद्वा तां मोहस्मामद्वृष्मः कामविवाहितः ।

पडबाणाहतः कामं मनसा समर्पितयद् ॥ 21 ॥

Seeing Her Śumbha was very much enchanted with passionate love and struck with, the five arrows of cupid, thought thus: How wonderful is Her lovely countenance! See! How wonderful and amazing is Her skilfulness! Delicacy and capability to endure the hardships of war, though quite contrary to each other, are both in Her.

अंही रूपमिदं स्यमगहो चातुर्धयेबुतम् ।

सौकुमार्य च धैर्य च परस्यरिवीध यत् ॥ 22 ॥

What a wonder is this! Her bodies are extremely delicate and limbs are lean and thin; besides She is lately blooming into womanhood; still She does not feel any passion; this is undoubtedly very wonderful!

सुकुमाराशतितन्यंगी सदा: प्रकटयीवना ।

चित्रप्रेतदसी बाला कामभावविर्वित्ति ॥ 23 ॥

कामकान्तासमा रूपे सर्वलक्षणलक्षिता ।

जचिकेकं पिकित्त हौत सर्वान्महावल्न् ॥ 24 ॥

She is exquisitely beautiful that can be desired of in one's mind; and though She is endowed with all the auspicious signs, yet She has no inclinations for all the pleasure and allurements of the world and is now slaying the powerful Asuras; this is wonderful indeed!

उपायः को3त्र कर्तेल्यो येन मे वर्गगा भयेत् ।

न मन्त्रा वा मरालाड़ीरामायेन सत्रिषी मम ॥ 25 ॥

Now what steps are to be taken so that this Lady comes under my control? All the Mantrams also are not with me now to bring over this Swan-eyed Lady unto me.

सर्वेनमयी होषा मोहिनी मदार्षिति ।

सुन्दरीयं कवं मे स्याहजगना वरवर्गिनी ॥ 26 ॥

पातालगमनं मेउत्र न युक्तं समरांगणत् ।

सामदानविषयेक्ष्य तेयं साधया महावला ॥ 27 ॥

This proud lovely Lady is the incarnate of all Mantrams; how will She come under my control? This heroic Lady cannot be controlled by conciliatory words, allurements, dissensions; it is not advisable, too, to fly away from the battle-field and to go to Pātāla.

किं कतवैल्व चान्तव्य विषये समुपस्थिते ।

मरणं नोतमं चात्र स्कीकृतं तु यशोप्रदात् ॥ 28 ॥

मरणं श्रक्रिधितः प्रोक्ते संगरे मेगलास्यदात् ।

यत्तस्मानवलयोर्धियोर्धियते। किल ॥ 29 ॥

What am I to do? Where shall I go in this critical moment? And if I die at the hands of this Lady, that death is not a glorious one; it will take away my fame. The death in a battle-field is conducive to one's well being, so the sages say, when both the parties are equally strong.

प्रातयेरे दैर्वत्तिता नारी नरशतोतमा ।

नाशायास्कुलस्येह सर्वधात्रतिकाराजकला ॥ 30 ॥

दृषा किं सामवाक्यानि मय योज्यानि साम्यान् ।

हननायागत होषा किं तु सामना प्रसीदिति ॥ 31 ॥

The Devas have created this Lady stronger than even hundred strong men; She is a woman merely in name. This Lady is very powerful and has come here to destroy the Dānavas; there is no doubt in this. What effect will conciliatory words now produce on Her; She has come to slay us; Will She be appeased with good words?

न दानैश्रातिर्तुं योग्य नानागस्विध्यपिता ।

येवसूत विफलः कामं सर्वदेववशानुगा ॥ 32 ॥

Neither will allurements of precious things be

Book V Chapter XXXI

of any avail, for She is decked with various arms and weapons; nor will it be of any use to sow dissensions between the Devas and Her. Further all the Devas are under Her control.

तस्मातु मरणो श्रेयो न संग्रामे पतयवन् ।

जयो वा मरणं वाउँ घावलेवे यथाविधि ॥ 33 ॥

Therefore it is far better to die than to fly; victory or death would come unto me today as Fate has ordained.

व्यास उवाच

इति संवैल्यानः स गुणः सचाशितोभवत् ।

युद्धाय सुश्रियो भूत्वा तापुवावा पुरः स्थितम् ॥ 34 ॥

देवि युध्यव कान्तेउ ह्यावाउं ने परिघमः ।

मूर्जा5स किल नारीणां नायं धर्मः कदाचन ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus thinking in his mind, Sumbha became ready to shew his strength; and firmly resolved to fight, he said to the Devi before him: "O Devi! Fight. But, O One of delicate limbs! Thy so much toil is in vain. Thou hast no sense at all; for Thou art doing contrary to the doings of woman-kind.

नारीर्णा लोचने बाणा घुवावेव शरासनम् ।

हावभावासु शस्त्राणि पुर्णिलल्यं विवश्रण: ॥ 36 ॥

सत्राहुशागगोजंत्र रथधारी पनोरथः ।

मन्दप्राजित्यर्ने भेरीश्वदो नान्यः कदाचन ॥ 37 ॥

The pair of eyes of women are their arrows; the eyebrows are their bows; their gestures and postures are their weapons and their hits are those persons who are skilled in amorous love sentiments. The dyes used in painting the bodies are their amorous, their mental desires are their chariots, so sweet soft words and conversations are their trumpet sounds; women have no other things for their war preparations.

अन्याख्याणरी स्त्रीण विडवनमसंगयम् ।

तरजेदे भूषणं काने न च धार्थे कदाचन ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore, O Beloved! Any other weapons are mere mockeries and ridiculous; their modesty is their ornament; impudence can never grace them.

युध्यमाना वरा नारी कक्रीश्वामिपूषयते ।

स्तनी संगोपनीदी वा धनुषः कर्णी कयम् ॥ 39 ॥

An exquisitely beautiful woman, if engaged in a fight will look harsh; especially when Thou wilt draw Thy bow, how wilt Thou be able to hide Thy breasts?

केव मन्दामाने कुरा नदामादाय धावनम् ।

बुद्धिदा कालिका तेत्र चाणुषा परानीक्षा ॥ 40 ॥

When Thou wilt run with Thy club, where will Thy gentle treadings go? O Beautiful! Thy councillors are this Kalikā and the stupid Cāmundā.

चिषुकामान्यमध्यसा लालनेउपुस्वारा शिका ।

वाहनं मृगराडासे सर्वसत्तचयंकरः ॥ 41 ॥

Candikā is Thy adviser her voice is very hoarse; how can then she be able to nurse Thee? Again this Lion, the terror of all the beings, is Thy carrier. Therefore.

वीणानादं परित्यज प्रधटानादं करोषि यत् ।

रूपयौवियोः सर्वे विरोधि चरावर्धिनि ॥ 42 ॥

O Dear! Leave aside all these and come over unto me. O Beautiful One! That Thou art ringing Thy bells and dost not sound Thy lute goes quite against Thy beauty and youth.

यदि ते संगरेळधारित कुकराण भव भाभिनी ।

लप्योदी कुनखी कृतः ध्यक्षरणां विलेत्वाचे ॥ 43 ॥

लम्बयात इकुन्ची च माजार्चवनाकृति: ।

ईपुर्णं कल्पामाध्याय तिछा सुखे चिक्षा भव ॥ 44 ॥

O Sensitive One! If Thou likest to fight, better assume an ugly appearance, let Thy nature be ferocious and cruel; let Thy colour be black like a crow; lips elongated, legs long, nails ugly, teeth horrible, and let Thy eyes be ugly or yellow like those of a cat.

कर्कर्णं वचनं बृहि ततो सुद्धं करोम्यहम् ।

इंडूर्णीं सुदतीं दृष्टवा न मे पाणिगः प्रसीदिति ॥ 4 5 ॥

हनुं त्वां मृणागावासिंक कामकानोयेमे मृढे ।

O Devi! Assume such an ugly appearance and stand firmly for the fight. O Deer-eyed One! Speak first harsh words unto me; then I will fight with

Thee; my hand does not get up to strike Thee with handsome teeth, in the battle-field, Who art like a second Rati."

व्यास उवाच

इति बुवाणं कामार्तं बीक्ष्य तं जगद्धिष्का ॥ 4 6 ॥

सितपूर्विमिंदं वावस्यमुवाच भरतोतम ।

Vyāsa said: O Best of the descendants of Bharata! When Śumbha said thus, the Divine Mother, seeing him passionate, smiled and said:

देव्यवाच

किं विधीदसि मन्दात्मकामबाणवियोहितः ॥ 47 ॥

प्रेक्षाकार्ड स्थिता मूद कुरु कालिकया मृधम् ।

चामुपडया वा कुवेते तव योग्ये राणांगणे ॥ 48 ॥

प्रहरव यथाकामं नाई त्वां योद्मूलसहै ।

“O Stupid One! Why are you so much distressed with passion? O Fool! If your haud does not come forward to strike weapons at Me, then fight with this ugly Kālikā or Cāmuṇḍā; they are your best compeers in the battle-field; they will fight with you; I will stand as a mere Witness.

इन्युसना कालिकां प्राद देवी मयुर्या सिरा ॥ 49 ॥

जहोनं कालिके कृरे कुरूपप्रियमाहये ।

Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavati said to Kālika in sweet words: "O Kālika! Your nature is fierce; this Śumbha likes also the fierce; so kill him."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता कालिका कालप्रेति कालकपिणी ॥ 50 ॥

गदा प्रगृहा तस्या तस्यावाजी कृतोघाम ।

Vyāsa said: O King! That Kālika, the incarnate of Death, thus ordered, took up Her club immediately and became ready to fight, as if sent there direct by the God of Death.

तयोः परस्यं युद्धे बभूवातिभयानकम् ॥ 51 ॥

पश्यां सर्वैद्वानां मुनिनो च महात्यनाम् ।

A dreadful fight then ensued between the two; and the high-souled Munis and the Devas were present there and witnessed the great event.

गदामुहाय गृभभो3द जघान कालिकां रो ॥ 52 ॥

कालिका दैत्यसाजानं गदया न्यहनद्भुगम् ।

बर्भजास्य रथं चएडी गदाय कनकोज्ज्वलम् ॥ 53 ॥

खान्द्वता जघनागुं दाफकं दाफाग्वसना ।

Śumbha first struck at Kalikā, raising his club. Kalikā, then, struck Śumbha in return with her club violently. Instantly she made a dreadful sound, broke down his chariot, glittering like gold, into pieces, killed the horse of the chariot and slew the charioteer.

स पदातिर्वादो गुर्वीं समादाय कुधान्वितः ॥ 54 ॥

कालिकापुभवोमीये प्रहसान्तनता ।

Walking, then, on foot with a very heavy club in his hand, Śumbha struck with great anger on the breast of Kalikā and began to laugh.

वड्यचिता गदादारां खड्यामादाय सच्चा ॥ 55 ॥

चिच्छेदायभुंजस्वंसायुंचन्द्रान्धितम् ।

Kālikā, in the meanwhile, rendering his stroke useless, soon took up Her axe and cut off his left hand, pasted with sandal and decked with arms and weapons.

स छिड़बाहुविंशयो गदाणाणिः पारित्तुः ॥ 56 ॥

अधिरेष समानार्थ कालिकामहानत्तदा ।

His left hand thus cut off, his whole body was drenched with torrents of blood; yet he came up with club in his hand and struck Kalikā with it.

काली च कवालेत पुर्ज नस्याव दक्षिणम् ॥ 57 ॥

चिछ्छेउ प्रहस्नी सा सगदं किल सांगदम् ।

Kālika, too, laughed and with Her scimitar cut off his right arm holding the club and ornamented with armlet.

कर्तुं पादपूहरां स कुषितः प्रययौ जवात् ॥ 58 ॥

काली चिच्छेच्चे चरणी खड़ोगनाय त्वारीकता ।

Śumbha became angry and came up violently to kick Her when Kālīkā quickly cut off his two legs.

सच्छिकरणपाठ़ेपि सिंह तिक्षिति च बुच्न ॥ 59 ॥

धायमानो ययावाणु कालिका भीषयाश्रि ।

His arms and legs thus severed from his body, the Demon frightened Kālīkā and told Her. "Wait, wait." And soon he came up before Her.

तमापण्ड्तमालीकरण कालिका कमलोषमम् ॥ 60 ॥

चकर्त मलकं कंठादुघिरीयचहं घुगम् ।

Book V Chapter XXXII

Seeing the Demon coming, Kálikā severed his neck from his body like a lotus; blood began to gush out in continuous streams.

छिडेउसी मस्तके भूपी पपात गिरिसझिभः ॥ 63 ॥

प्राणा विनिर्यमुक्तस्य देहादुकन्मय सत्वम् ।

O King! The head of Šumbha, thus severed from his body, fell on the ground like a mountain. Immediately the life left the body.

तातपुं पत्ति देत्यं चूद्या देया: सवासना: ॥ 62 ॥

गुडुकुर्नां तदा वैधी वापुपां कालिकां नवा ।

Seeing the Dānava fell down lifeless, Indra and the other hosts of Devas began to worship the Devi Bhagavatī, Cāmunḍā, and Kālīkā and chanted lovely hymns to them.

ववुर्वाता: शिवास्तत्र दिशिक्ष विमला भूषणम् ॥ 63 ॥

वेपूवुक्षान्यो होमे प्रदक्षिणशिक्षा: शुभाः ।

The winds then began to blow pleasantly; all the quarters looked very clear and Fire in sacrificial altars, being circumambulated, became very propitious.

इतनेशेषा थे दैत्याः प्रणाय जगद्धिकवम् ॥ 64 ॥

त्वक्तानउदयुपानि ते सर्वे पातालं प्रययुँच ।

On the other hand, those Daityas that remained alive quitted their arms and weapons, bowed down to the Divine Mother, and fled away one and all to the Pātāla.

तृत्ते सर्वमाख्यानं देत्याश्रितमुत्तमम् ॥ 65 ॥

गृभाष्टीर्नां वधं चैव सुराणां रक्षणं तथा ।

O King! I have now described in regular order to you how the Devi protected the Devas and destroyed Sumbha and other Asuras.

एतदाख्यानकं सर्वे पठतिनं भुवि मानवाः ॥ 66 ॥

शुणतिने च सहा भवनया ते कृतावर्ण भवतिन हि ।

Those human beings on the surface of the earth that read this anecdote from the beginning to the very end or hear it constantly, get all their desires fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.

अपुजे तपते पुजार्धिंग्रंघ धर्न बहु ॥ 67 ॥

रोगी च मुचले रोगास्वी-कामानवायुगत ।

O King! Verily he gets a son who has not got any son; he gets abundance of wealth who is without any wealth; the diseased become cured of their diseases; what more can be said than the fact that he who hears this glorious deed of the Devi in its entirety, gets all that he desires.

शकुत्तो न भयं तत्य य इदं चरितं शुभम् ।

भूणीति पदते नित्यं मृतिमाज्ञावते नः ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पड्यसकन्धे

शुभ्यधौ नाम एकविंशोउधायः ॥ 31 ॥ 11

O King! That man who reads daily this holy anecdote or hears it, has never to fear from his enemies; in addition he gets liberation after leaving his this body.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book

on the death of Sumbha in the Mahā Purānam

Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXXII

CHAPTER XXXII

On the King Surahta's Going to the Forest

जनमेजर उवाच

महिमा वर्णते सम्बन्धिकृतकायास्तव्या मुने ।

कैन चारात्रिता पूर्वं चरित्रजयोगतः ॥ १ ॥

Janamejaya said: O Best of Munis! The glory of Caṇḍikā has been fully described by you. By whom was She worshipped in the ancient times after the reading and hearing of Her three glorious deeds (the killing of Madhu Kaṭṭabha, etc.)?

प्रसत्रा कस्य बरतृ देकेन प्राप्तं फलं महत् ।

आगाध्य कामादों देर्वीं कथायस्य कृपानिधे ॥ 2 ॥

उपासनाविधि बहास्तथा पूजाविधि वह ।

वित्तरेण महाभाग होमम्य च वित्तिं पुनः ॥ ३ ॥

Who was it that derived the best effects by worshipping the Devi, the Bestower of all desires? When and with whom was She pleased and then offered boons? O Ocean of mercy! Kindly narrate fully all these things to me. O Brāhmana! Describe

to me also the rules how the meditation, worship and Homa of the Great Devi are conducted.

सूत जतच

इति भूपवचः शुत्वा प्रीतः सत्वातीसुतः ।

प्रत्युवाच नृपं कृष्णो महामायापूजनम् ॥ 4 ॥

Sūta said: “O Rsis! Kṛṣna Dvaipāyana, the son of Satyavati, was very glad to hear these questions of Janamejaya and began to describe how the worship, etc., of the Mahā Māyā, the Devi Bhagavati are to be done.

व्यास उवाच

स्वातोचिष्ठन्तरे पूर्व सुर्यो नाम पाधिद्धः ।

बधूव परमोदारः प्रजापालनततरः ॥ 5 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! In days of yore in Svārocīṣa Manvantara there was a king, named Suratha, very liberal-minded and devoted to govern well his subjects.

सत्यवादी कर्मपोरो ब्राह्मणानां च पुत्रकः ।

गुरुभस्तितो नित्यं स्वदारयमने रतः ॥ 6 ॥

He was truthful, active and energetic, and devoted to his Guru; he always served the twice-born and he never used to hold any sexual intercourse except with his legal wife.

दानशीलोत्रविरोधी च धनुर्वैदकयागः ।

एवं पालयती राज्यं मेलछा: पर्वतावासिनः ॥ 7 ॥

He was generous, not liking to quarrel with anybody, and expert in the science of archery. While he was thus governing his kingdom, the Mleechas, the hill tribes, turned out his enemies.

बलाच्छुल्यमाप्रा: सैन्यं कृत्वा चतुर्विधम् ।

हृस्यध्रयपादातसिहातसे मदोकटा: ॥ 8 ॥

कोलाविद्यसिनः प्रापा: पृथ्वीमहणततया ।

सुध: सैन्यमादाय सम्पुखः सम्पघत ॥ 9 ॥

They destroyed the city of Kolā, became very haughty and turbulent and desired to conquer the whole earth by their sheer force. Thus accompanied by the great four-fold army elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry they came to conquer the dominion of the King Suratha.

यूद्धं समभवद्धोरं तस्य तैरतिदाफणी: ।

मलैच्छानां तु बलं स्वल्यं ग्रासनुद्वलम्बुद्धूनि ॥ १० ॥

तथापि तैर्जितो युद्धे देवहात्राव गरपात्रः ।

भानश्छ स्वारुं प्राप्तः सुरक्षं तुर्मपिडतम् ॥ १ १ १ ॥

A dreadful fight then ensued between the King and the dreadful Mlecchas. O King! The Mleccha forces were not at all numerous whereas the king were large; still the Mlecchas were lucky to win the battle. The King, defeated, fled to his own city which was a strongly fortified place.

चितयामास मेधावी राजा नीतिविश्वधानः ।

प्रधानान्विमना दूष्ठा श्रुवृष्ठसमाधिशान् ॥ १ २ ॥

स्थानं गृहीता विमुले परीखतुर्विगटजत् ।

कालप्रतीक्षा कतैम्वा किं वा युद्धं वरं मतम् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The good King, wise in statesmanship when he saw that his ministers had gone over to the enemies' party, became very anxious and thought whether it was advisable for him to wait for a better opportunity, remaining within his own extensive city, well guarded by a strong wall and ditch or it would be better to fight on.

मक्रिणः श्रत्रवाणा मन्योयाना न ते किल ।

कि करोमौति मनसा भूपति: समचितयत् ॥ 14 ॥

The King thought also that it would not at all be advisable to consult with his ministers who were, then, under the control of his enemies; what then would he do under the circumstances?

कदाचिते गृहीत्वा मां पाणाचारा: पराशिता: ।

सुबुभो3प्र प्रदास्यन्ति तदा किं वा भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

Those vicious ministers could at any time deliver him to the hands of his enemies; what would then happen to him!

पापबुद्धिरु विश्वासो न कतंब्यः कदाचन ।

कि ते वै प्रकुर्बिनि चे लोभवगगना ना: ॥ 16 ॥

Those men, that are avaricious, can do anything in this world; therefore it would never be advisable to trust them.

घातरं पितरं मित्रं सुहृदं बांधवं तथा ।

गुरुं पूर्यं द्वितं ऋषि लोपाधिद्ध: सदा नर: ॥ 17 ॥

The people under the sway of greed commit

Book V Chapter XXXII

injury to their fathers, brothers, friends, acquaintances, their Gurus and the adored Brāhmanas.

तस्मायमा न कर्तव्यो विश्वासः सर्वेधाउपूना ।

मंत्रिवर्गेस्तिपापिषे त्रगुष्वसमाप्रशिने ॥ 181 ॥

When the ministers had joined with his enemies, they could well be classed with the vicious; no doubt in this. Never could they be trusted under the above circumstances.

इति सच्छित्य मनसा राजा परयातुर्भानः ।

एकाकी ह्वयामहा निर्जीगम युगत्ततः ॥ 19 ॥

असहायो३य निर्णय ल्हानं वनमाश्रितः ।

चिन्त्यामास मेधावी कव रोल्व्यं मया पुतः ॥ 20 ॥

Thus pondering over the matter, the King became absentminded, and, finding no remedy, went out of the city alone, mounted on a horse. The intelligent King, helpless, entered into a dense forest and thought where would he go now?

योजनप्रयमाते तु घुनेराभ्रमपुत्तमम् ।

जात्वा जगाम भूपालस्तापसस्य सुयेधसः ॥ 21 ॥

Knowing, then, that there was, at a distance of three Yojanas from that place, a hermitage of the great ascetic, the Sumedhā Rṣi, the King went there.

Note: A Yojana is a distance measuring four Krōsas or eight or nine miles.

बहुद्धसयायुक्ते नदीपुलिनसंश्रितम् ।

निर्वेलाशयादकौणी कोकिलतारवमिडतम् ॥ 22 ॥

शिणायाध्यवनगश्दाको भृगायुध्यतावत् ।

नीवातारभुपव्यकावों सुपुधफलपादायम् ॥ 23 ॥

O King! That hermitage was more beautiful than even the Heavens; it was on the bank of a river; various kinds of trees were there; it was frequented with wild animals having no enmity with each other; the whole place was echoed with the sounds of cuckoos.

होमधूमसुनघेन प्रीतिंदं प्राणिनां सदा ।

वेट्यविनस्माकान्तं स्वगाँदपि मनोहरम् ॥ 24 ॥

दूद्वा तामश्रयं नारा बभावसी मुवात्वितः ।

भयं त्यक्त्वा मिति चक्रे विश्रायाव ग्रिजान्ये ॥ 25 ॥

The students were studying and reverberating

the atmosphere with their Vedic chants; hundreds of herds of deer were running there; rice trees had grown there wildly at places and their harvests were collected at places; good flowery trees and others with delicious fruits were seen there; at places fragrant smells of oblations of ghee, etc., were coming; all these were delighting to any man who went or stayed there. The King Suratha was very glad to see that Śārama; he became fearless and wanted to stay there in the hermitage of the Brāhmin.

आसाज्य पादधे३ हुं जगाम दिव्यान्वितः ।

दूढ़ता ते पुनिभासीने सातच्छायसु संश्रितम् ॥ 26 ॥

Fastening his horse at the root of a tree, the King approached humbly to the Rşi, and saw that the Muni was seated on a deer skin under the shade of dense Sal trees.

भूगतिज्ञानसं शान्तं तस्माजितकृशं ऋतुम् ।

अधयापनं तिणाध्यो ऋदेशागक्षार्विहिनम् ॥ 27 ॥

He was peaceful, lean and thin by tapasyā. His stature was straight; and he was teaching his disciples and explaining to them the meaning of the Veda Śāstras.

रहितं क्रोधलोभाषदैद्धातीतं विमत्सम् ।

आत्मान्तारं सत्यवादिनं ग्रामसंयुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

He was void of anger, greed, etc., beyond all the dualities, without any jealousy, always devoted to the contemplation of his Self, truthful and full of peace.

तं वीक्ष्य भूपतिभूभी पपात् दण्डवन्ता ।

तद्यो3धुजालापूर्णनयनः प्रेमसंयुतः ॥ 29 ॥

जतिष्ठातिष भई ते तयुबाच तदा मृति: ।

शिष्यो ददो बूर्गी तस्ये गुरुणा नोदितस्तदा ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing him the King was filled with tears and prostrated before him and fell like a stick before him. The Muni, seeing him thus, asked him to get up and enquired about his welfare. A disciple then, at the sign of the Guru, gave him a kuśāsana, to take his seat.

उत्थाय नृपतिस्तस्यां समासीनस्तद्वाना ।

अर्धयपाढ़ाईं चक्रे सुभेय विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 31 ॥

The King got up and at his permission took his seat on that kuśāsana; then the Muni worshipped the King duly by offering to him water to wash his feet, and Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc).

पूच्छात्र कुतः प्रातः कस्वं चिंतापः कवम् ।

कवयवय यथाकामा संवृत्तं कारणं चिक्छ् ॥ 32 ॥

Then the Muni asked him “Who are you? What for are you come here? Why are you so anxious? Tell frankly all these that are not yet known to me.

किमागमनकृत्वं ते बृहि कार्य मनोगतम् ।

कनिषेय वार्तिड़न काममसाध्यमपि यतच ॥ 33 ॥

What do you want? Speak out your mind. Even if that be impracticable, I will no doubt try my best to accomplish your desired ends."

राजोबाब

सुरयो नाम राजाड़े शुभ्रभिश्र पश्रजितः ।

स्वक्त्वा राज्यं गृहं भाघामिंहे ते शरणं ततः ॥ 34 ॥

The King said: "O Muni! I am the King Suraha; defeated by my enemy, I have left my kingdom, palace, and wife and wife and have come to your refuge."

यदाझापयसे ब्रह्मस्तदं घन्सितपर: ।

कन्धियामि न मे जाता स्वद्यः: पृथिवीतले ॥ 35 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! I am ready to do whatever you order me; on this surface of the earth there is no one but you who can protect me.

गुव्यो मे भयं घोरं प्राप्तोउम्यहु त्वतितकम् ।

ग्रायस् मुनिशादूलं शरणागततस्वल १३ ३ १ ॥

Now I am very much terrified by my enemy; therefore I have come to you. O Muni! You protect those who come to seek your refuge; I have now come here to seek your shelter; so save me from this danger."

झशिकताव

निर्भयं त्रस रोजेन्द्र नात्र ते श्रवः किल ।

आगमिष्यन्ति बलिनो निश्चयं तपसो बलात् ॥ 37 ॥

The Maharṣi said: “O King! Stay here without

any fear; none of your enemies would be able to enter this hermitage by my power of tapasyā, even if they be very powerful.

नात्र हिंसा प्रकर्निया वनवृत्त्या नृपोतम ।

कर्तेयं जीवनं शस्तै-निंवारफलमुतकैः ॥ 38 ॥

O Best of Kings! You will not be allowed to kill animals here; you will have to sustain yourself on this wild rice, roots and fruits, etc., as the rules of the forest living permit.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य चयः शुत्वा निर्भयः स नुपस्तदा ।

उवासाभप्र एवासी फलमूलाशनः शुधि: ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus hearing his words, the King began to live there, with all purity and without any fear, on roots and fruits.

कदाधित्य नुपस्तत्र शुक्ष्छ्छायां समाधितः ।

चिन्त्यामास चितातों गृह् एव गताशय: ॥ 40 ॥

राज्ये मे शुत्रधिः प्राप्तं सेन्द्रेः पायाते: सदा ।

संपीडिता: स्युतोंकास्तैतुंचारोरितोत्रिः ॥ 41 ॥

Once the King, while taking rest under the shade of a tree, while thinking of various things, thought of his own house thus: "My enemies have, no doubt, acquired my kingdom, but they are vicious and wicked, shameless Mlecchas and always addicted to sinful deeds; certainly they are tormenting my subjects.

गजाछ़ तुराग: सर्वे दुर्बलान भट्यवर्जितः ।

जाताः: स्युनीत्र सन्देशः: ग्रुशणा परीपितिहतः ॥ 4 2 ॥

My elephants and horses are not regularly getting their food and have all become powerless; certainly they are suffering very much from my enemies.

सेवका मम सर्वे ते शनुर्णां वश्चतिनतः ।

दुःखित एव जाताः स्युः पालिता ये यमा पुग ॥ 4 3 ॥

All the servants that were nourished by me before are now all suffering from troubles, having been subjected by my enemies.

धनं मे सुदुर्घारिसुद्वायपरे: परैः ।

द्वृतासवभुविष्यादिव्याने स्यामाग्रिगत किल ॥ 44 ॥

The wicked enemies are certainly squandering

Book V Chapter XXXII

away my hoarded wealth to bad immoral purposes in gambling, drinking and in revelling with prostitutes.

कोश्रार्यं कलिथन्ति व्यसनैः पायबुद्धः ।

न पाखदानपिणुणा नलैच्छास्ते मनिजणोपे में ॥ 45 ॥

Those Mleccchas and my ministers are always intent on vicious acts; they do not know who are the proper persons to be given charities; so they will no doubt exhaust away my coffers in doing sinful acts."

इति चिन्तापरो राजा वृक्षमूलस्थितो यदा ।

तद्वाजगाम वैश्यस्तु काश्रदातिपरस्तथा ॥ 46 ॥

While the King was thus meditating, seated at the root of a tree, there came one man of the Vaiśya caste looking very distressed.

यूरेण पुरतो दृष्टः पार्थे तजोपरेशितः ।

पणछ्त तं गूपः कोजीस कुण एवागातो वनम् ॥ 47 ॥

The King saw and instantly bade him take his seat beside him; then the King asked the Vaiśya: "O Noble One! Of what caste are you? Whence are you coming to this forest? What is your name? What for you look so pale and distressed? What calamity has befallen to you?

कोसि कमाव्छ दौनोसि सहितः शोकपीडितः ।

बृहि सर्वे महाभाग मैत्री साप्तपरीं मत ॥ 4 8 ॥

O Good One! Two persons become friends whenever they speak seven words amongst them; according to this rule I am your friend; tell me, therefore, truly all these things."

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं रात्रसमुवाच विशोनम: ।

उविव्यय स्थिति भूत्वा मत्वा साधुसूसामात्म ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Vaiśya, hearing these words from the King, took his seat and felt himself much relieved and thinking that he has met with a saint, began to speak thus:

धैर्य उवाच

मिगाई धैर्यजातीयः समाधिनानि विश्रतः ।

धनवान्यर्मिनुण: सत्यवाननमुक: ॥ 50 ॥

"O my Friend! I belong to the Vaiśya caste; my name is Samādhi; I was rich, never I had my any jealousy towards anybody; always I used to speak truth and was devoted to religious acts.

पुत्रवृत्तरिंस्तरोई धनलुब्धीरसाधुधिः ।

'कृपणेति मियं कृत्वा त्यक्त्वा मायां सुदुस्त्यजाम् ।

स्वजनेच सर्वस्तः प्राणतोद्यिन वनागुरु वै ॥ 51 ॥

कोशिस त्वं भायवात्यामासि कथयस्य प्रियाधुना ।

My wife and sons are very greedy of money and are irreligious; so they cut off all their affections and connections with me, very difficult to cut though, and have driven me out of the house on the pretext that I am very miserly. Thus forsaken by my relatives, I have now come to this forest. You look to be a fortunate man; therefore kindly, O Dear One! give me now your introduction and oblige.

राजाधव

सुयो नाम राजाऊं हरसुधिभः पीडितोभवम् ॥ 52 ॥

प्राणोटिभ्य गतराज्योउर अमिनिधः परिवहितः ।

विद्या त्वमत्र मित्रं मे मिलितोसि विशोतम ॥ 53 ॥

The King said: “I am the King Suratha; lately I had a defeat from the dacoits; moreover my ministers deceived me; consequently I am deprived of my kingdom and have now come here. O Best of Vaśiyas! Fortunately you have come to me today as my friend.

सुखेन विहृतिथावो वनेत्र शुभपादेपे ।

गोके तव गहावृष्टे सस्थो भव विशोधनम ॥ 54 ॥

अत्रेच च यथाकामं सुखं तिह मया सह ।

We two will repose here gladly in this beautiful forest covered with trees. O Intelligent One! Now quite your sorrow; be calm and quiet and rest with me, at your leisure, here happily."

སྟོལ་ཀྱི་བྱི

कुटुर्बे मे निरालबं मया शीने सुखःखितम् ।

भविष्यिति च चिन्तातं व्याशिकोपेलपतिभन् ॥ 55 ॥

The Vaïsya said: "O King! My friends and relatives must have been helpless, very sorrowful

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

and they are distressed at my absence; they must have been troubled very much by diseases and misfortunes no doubt and have become very anxious.

भार्विद्रे सुखं नो वा पुरवेईे न वा सुखम् ।

इति चिन्तातुंरं चेते न वे शाप्यति भूयिपि ॥ 56 ॥

O King! I cannot remain quiet; my mind is being troubled with the thought how my wife and sons are spending their times now—in pain or happiness?

कटा उस्ये सुतं घायाँ गृहं स्वजनमेव च ।

स्वस्थं न मवनगो राजनूहिष्चिताकुलें भूश्म । ५७ १ ॥

I am always thinking when I would see again my sons, wife, relatives, friends, acquaintances and my house? I cannot make me calm and quiet."

राजोबाच

वैनिरस्तोत्र सि पुरावीरसद्धुर्जे: सूबालिजीः ।

तान्यूहा किं सुखें तेउघा घबिध्यति महामते ॥ 58 ॥

The King said: “O Intelligent One! What pleasure can you expect to see your wicked sons and treacherous relatives who have driven you out of your house?

हितकारी वर: श्रादुर्ःखादा: सुहदः कुतः ।

तस्माल्स्वं मनः कृत्वा विहार्त्व मया सह ॥ 59 ॥

Even the enemies are far better, provided they do good to us; what sorts of friends are they who impose on us afflictions and sorrows. Do you, therefore, make your mind calm and quiet and remain here in greatest peace and happiness."

ईपर उचाच

मनो मे न स्थरं राजन्मवत्यहा सुदुःखितम् ।

चिन्तायाज कुटुब्बस्य दुस्त्यजस्य दुरातमिधः ॥ 6० ॥

The Vaiśya said: “O King! Even those that are wicked and cruel cannot quit their relatives. Today my mind is greatly agitated with the thought of my relatives; I cannot remain quiet.”

राजोवाच

ममापि राजजं दुःखं दुनोति किल मानसम् ।

भृछाजोडा मुनि शान्ते शोकानाशमीक्षायम् ॥ 61 ॥

The King said: “My mind too, is incessantly troubled with the thought of my kingdom. Come; let both of us go to the Muni and ask him what is the medicine for the cure of these our mental agonies.”

व्यास उवाच

इति कृत्वा मार्ति तौ तु राजा वैय्यक्षु जमतुः ।

भूमि तौ विनयोपेते प्रधुं शोकस्य काराणम् ॥ 62 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Thus making their determinations, they went humbly to the Muni to ask him what were the causes of their sorrows?

गत्वा ते प्रपिष्यताह् राजा ऋषिमनुत्तमम् ।

आर्याने सव्यगराने: शान्ते शान्तिम्युपगताः ॥ 63 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पद्यकन्वभे

द्वार्षिणो5यायः 11 32 11

The King then went close to him and bowing down before him, took his seat and began to ask calmly and quietly the Muni who was sitting calm and serene.

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the King Suratha's going

to the forest in the Mahāpurānam,

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2017年1月1日

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Greatness of the Devi

राजोवाच

मुने वैश्योउयम्युना बने मे शिरतां रातः ।

पूर्वद्वर्िरिंस्तोई प्राप्तोउर्र मम संभामम् ॥ १ ॥

The king Suratha said: "O Muni! This Vaiśya

is now become a friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by his sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest.

"कुटुब्बविरहेशणासी दुःविह्नोतीव दुर्भानः ।

Book V Chapter XXXIII

न शान्तिमुपायायेप तथैव मम साम्यतम् ।

गतराजस्य दुःखेन शोकातोंस्मि महामाते ॥'

निकाणर्ण च मे चिंता इद्यात्र निवर्तेत ।

हया मे दुबैलतः स्युः किं नजा: श्रवुरर्ग नातः ॥ २ ॥

He is now suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has become very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace whatsoever. I am also become like him and have become very distressed owing to my kingdom being robbed away. This thought, though really devoid of any substantial cause, is not leaving my heart now. Oh! My elephants and horses, now under my enemies, have become weak.

भृत्वरर्भेल्हा दुःखी जात: स्यतुग मवा विजा ।

कोशुर्धयं कार्यिन्ति चिपतोडिलताखणात् ॥ ३ ॥

इत्येवं चिन्तयानस्य च मे निद्रा तनी सुखम् ।

जानामीदं जगन्मिष्या स्वप्नवस्तमेवेच हि ॥ 4 ॥

My servants are suffering very much owing to my absence! My enemies will, within no time, squander away forcibly all my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving me any happiness; nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and anxiety.

जान्तोरीय मनो घान्तं न स्वियं भवति प्रभो ।

कोई के3घा गना: के3मी न ते मे च सहोदारः ॥ 5 ॥

न पुत्रा न च मित्राणि येषां दुःखं दुनेति माम् ।

प्रभोउयिति जानाभि तथापि मम मानसः ॥ 6 ॥

O Lord! I know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind is so deluded that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those horses and elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends; yet I feel very much for them and am troubled with their troubles. O Muni! I know these all are delusions; still I am not able to make mymind free from them.

मोहो नैवापसति किं तत्काणमढुतम् ।

स्वामित्यमसि सर्वतः सर्वसंशयनागक्त् ॥ 7 ॥

कारणं बृहि मोहस्य मासस्य च स्वामित्ये ।

This is very wonderful indeed! What is the

cause of all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you are fully able to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy! Kindly explain to me and this Viśya the cause of all this delusion."

व्यास उवाच

इति पृष्ठस्तदा राजा सुमेधा मुनिसस्तमः ॥ 8 ॥

तमुवाच परं जानं शोकमोहित्यानगम् ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the Muni in reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that his delusion and sorrow might vanish.”

झरिग्वताव

भृगु राजन्यवश्यामि कारणं बन्धमोक्षयोः ॥ 9 ॥

महामाथीत विद्यालाया सर्वेयं प्राणिनामिक ।

The Muni said: “O King! I am telling you the cause of bondage as well the cause of bondage as well the cause of release of all the beings in this Universe. She is known as Mahā Māyā. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti, the state of equilibrium of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tāmas.

बह्वा विष्णुसंशासन्सुराषड्वकर्णो5नितः ॥ १० ॥

सर्वे देवा मनुवाया नन्ववौरगाराक्षसाः ।

वृक्षाक्ष विविधा बल्ल्वः पशवो मृगपाक्षिणः ॥ १ १ ॥

मायाधीनाक्ष ते सर्वे भाजर्न बंधेमोक्षणेः ।

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Varuna, Vāyu, and the other Devas, Gandharvas, Nāgas, Rāksasas, men, deer, animals, birds, trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Māyā; thus they are all bound; again they all get release when they are released by that Māyā.

तया सृष्टिमितं सर्वे जनस्थावरजंभम् ॥ १ २ ॥

तद्धगे वर्तेत नूनं मोहजारेतन यंत्रितम् ।

By Her is created all this world, moving and not moving, all the beings are caught in Her net and all are under the control of Her.

त्वं किंवानानुभेदेकः क्षत्रियो वसानउर्जितः ॥ 13 ॥

ज्ञानिनामपि चेतांमि मोहयत्वत्निरं हि स ।

You are a Kṣattriya; so Rajoguna preponderates

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

in you and your heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Māyā, deludes even the minds of those who are Jūnāns or wise; you are but an ordinary man compared to them.

क्रेशशासुरेवाठा झाने सत्यपि शेपतः ॥ 14 ॥

तेषि रागवशाल्लोके क्षमति परिणोहिताः ।

Even Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa, though possessed of vast wisdom, still roam, under the sway of Māyā, in the three worlds completely deluded by their attachments to the sensual objects.

पुरा सत्ययुगे रात्निथनुर्गरायण: स्वयम् ॥ 15 ॥

शेत्राधीयं समासादा चकार विवृतं तपः ।

O King! In the Satya Yuga, in ancient times Visnu Nārāyaṇa himself performed a very hard tapasyā in Śvetadvīpa.

वर्षाणामयुतं यावद् इद्यविद्याप्रसक्तये ॥ 16 ॥

अनश्यसुखायासी चिन्तयानस्ततः परम् ।

He passed away full ten thousand years in meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken everlasting Bliss and becoming steadfastly attached to Brāhma Vidyā.

एकसित्धिजनै देये बह्ञाउपि परमाङुते ॥ 17 ॥

स्थिततपसि राजेन्द्र मोहस्य विनिवृतये ।

O King! Brahmā, too, became engaged in performing a tapasyā, meditating the Primordial Force, Ādyā Śakti, in a very wonderful solitary place for the cessation of delusion.

क्वाधिष्ठापुरोदेजसी खलोतमातिरहितः ॥ 18 ॥

तस्माहोत्समुदाय वगमान्यदिह्वशा ।

चतुर्मुंवोर पीजेन्द्र तदैव नि:सूतः खलात् ॥ 19 ॥

मितिली मार्गमध्ये तु चतुर्मुंखचतुर्ष्जी ।

Once on a time Vāsudeva Hari wanted to go to another place; he got up and started to see other places. Brahmā, also, left his place and started for another destination.

अन्योयं गुर्वन्ती ती करलं करलविमिति स्म च || 20 ||

बहा प्रोवारा ते देवं कर्ताई ज्ञान: किल ।

When they met each other in their way, each one asked the other "Who are you?" The Prajāpati answered: "I am the Creator Brahmā."

विष्णुस्तमाह घो मूर्खं जगत्कर्तांहमच्युतः ॥ 21 ॥

त्वं किंव्यान्वहीनोरिस्त्र नतोरुणमवमाश्रितः ।

Hearing thus the Brahmā's words, Viṣṇu said: "O You Stupid! I am Acyuta Viṣṇu; therefore I am the Creator of this world." You are inferior to Me as there is so much of Rajoguna in preponderance in you.

सत्वाशितं हिं मां विविट्र वासुदेवं सन्तानम् ॥ 22 ॥

माया तं रक्षितोदीव कृत्वा युद्धे सुदारुभणम् ।

शरणं मे समायातो दानवाभ्यां प्रपीडितः ॥ 23 ॥

मया तो निर्हती कामं दानवी मधुकैट्यपी ।

Know Me as the eternal Vāsudeva, preponderating in Satīva Guna. Do you not remember that I fought a dreadful battle for you and thus saved your life a short while ago. I slew the two Dānavas Madhu and Kaitabha when you were much distressed by them and took My refuge.

कर्व गर्वायसे मंद मोहोरयं त्वंस सामप्रम्भ ।। 24 ॥

न मतोघ्याधिकः कश्रिसंसारोभिन्यमातिरे ।

How then do you boast now! O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide world, there is none superior to Me.

ब्रह्मविद्याच

एवं प्रवद्यानी ती ब्रह्माविष्यु परस्परम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुकुरदोषी वेयमानी लोहिताओं बभूवतुः ।

The Rşi said: “Thus engaged in disputing with each other, their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red.

प्रावुर्बपूव सहसा तयोर्विद्वदमानयो: ॥ 26 ॥

मध्ये लिंग सुधाश्रं तिवपुतं दीर्भीमद्धुतम् ।

When, Behold! there appeared suddenly between two disputants, a nectar-like white phallic emblem (Lüngam), wonderfully long and extensive.

आकाशे तरसा तत्र वागुवाचागरीस्थि ॥ 27 ॥

तो संबोध्य महाभागी विवदन्ते परस्पत् ।

Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the Heavens and addressed Brahmā and Viṣṇu who were quarrelling thus?

ब्रहाविष्णो विवादं मा कुतःतां वां परस्पत् ॥ 28 ॥

लिंगस्यास्य परं पारमधस्तादुपरि ध्रुवम् ।

Book V Chapter XXXIII

यो याति युवयोमीय से श्रेष्ठी वां सदैव हि ॥ 29 ॥

एकः प्रमातु पातालयाकाशमपरो5दृना ।

Whoever amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this Liṅgam whether beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly the superior of you two; let one of you therefore go down to Pātāla and let the other go up to you Heavens.

प्रमाणे मे चव: कार्यं त्वक्या वादि निर्विक्यम् ।। 3० ॥

मध्यस्प: सर्वदा कार्यों विवादोउस्मिन्नयोरिष्ट ।

Leave off your useless disputations and take my word as proof. It is always advisable to select an umpire to decide such a quarrel as this that has sprung up between you two.

ऋषिकवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं दिव्यं सजीभूतों कृतोघमौ ॥ 3 1 ॥

जममतुमितुमप्रस्थ लिङ्गम्बुतदार्जनम् ।

The Rsi said: O King! Hearing thus the divine word, both of them became ready and began energetically to measure the length of the wonderful Liṅgam that stood in front of them.

पातालमामदिष्णुबंद्रासुघाकागसे व ३३ २ ॥

परिमानुं मृतालिकुं स्वमहत्वविद्धुद्रे ।

Viṣṇu went down to Pātāla and Brahmā went up to Ākāśa to measure the Liṅgam and thus to ascertain their superiority.

विष्णुरीना क्रियहेशं श्रान्तः सर्वान्तया वतः ॥ 3 3 ॥

न प्राप्तनं स रिंगमाय रपितृवरा यथी स्थलम् ।

Going down some distance Viṣṇu got tired and doing his best, when he not find out the end of the Liṅgam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting place.

ब्रह्मासणछत्तश्छीर्ध पत्तिते केतकीद्वलम् ॥ 34 ॥

शिवस्य मस्तकताप्य परावृतो मुदापृतः ।

On the other hand, Brahmā was ascending to the skies when he got one Ketakī flower dropping from the head of the Lingam. He became over glad and returned also to the desired meeting place.

आगत्य तसरा जहा विणाये केतकीदलम् ॥ 35 ॥

दर्शपीथला च वितथमुवाच मदमोहितः ।

Brahmā became very much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at once showed that flower to Viṣṇu and spoke thus the false words:

लिङ्गस्य मस्तकाटेतदगुहितं केतकीदात्म् ॥ 36 ॥

अभिज्ञानाय चानीतं तत चित्तप्रणानाये ।

“O Viṣṇu! This Ketakī flower has been obtained from the head of the Lingam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it and be convinced in your heart.

शूला तद्बहागणो वाक्यं बृद्धा च केतकीद्वम् ॥ 37 ॥

हरितं प्रत्युवाचेदं साही कः कथायपुना ।

यथार्थवादी मेघावी सदाचारः शुचि: समः ॥ 38 ॥

साही भवति सर्वैर विवादे सपुचिष्यते ।

Hearing these words of Brahmā, Viṣṇu saw the Ketakī flower and said: "O Brahmā! Who is your witness in this matter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all, who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the witness in such matters of dispute.

ब्रहीावाच

दूरदेशात्समायाति साकी कः समये5रुना ॥ 39 ॥

यत्सर्व तद्वच: सेयं केतकी कथयिध्यति ।

इत्युक्त्वा प्रोत्त तत ब्रहणा केतकी सुकृष्म ॥ 40 ॥

वचनं प्रात तरसा शार्डिंणं प्रत्यवोध्यत् ।

शिवमूर्ति स्थितां ब्रह्मा गृहीत्वा यां समाताः ॥ 41 ॥

सद्रोहोउन के कत्वीस्थत्वया विजणो कदाचन ।

Brahmā said: “Who will come now as witness from that far off place? This Ketakī flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” Thus saying, Brahmā requested Ketakī to give evidence; Ketakī soon replied thus to convince Viṣṇu. “O Viṣṇu! I was on the head of Mahādeva; Brahmā has brought me from there down to this place; you ought not therefore to have any doubt on this point.

मग वाक्यं प्रमाणं हि बह्ञा पारबृतोउरह च ॥ 42 ॥

गृहीत्वा मां समयात: शिवभक्तैः समर्पिताम् ।

My word is the evidence; Brahmā has gone to the other end of the Liṅgam. Some devotee of Śiva put me on His head and Brahmā has got me down from there."

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

केतक्या वचनं श्रुला हरिराह स्मविश्व ।। 43 ॥

महादेव: प्रमाणं मे यद्यासी वचनं वदेत् ।

Hearing thus the words of Ketakī, Viṣṇu was very much astonished and said this: “I cannot trust your word; if Mahā Deva comes and speaks this himself, then I can trust and take it as a proof.”

ऋषिक्वाच

तदाकपर्यं हरेवाक्यं महादेव सनातनः ॥ 44 ॥

कृपितः केतकीं प्राह मिथ्यावादिनि मा वद ।

The Rṣi said: O King! The eternal Mahā Deva, hearing the words of Viṣṇu, spoke thus to Ketakī with great anger “O Liar! Do not utter such false words : You dropped down from My head and Brahmā while ascending up, picked you up on the way.

गच्छतो मध्यतः प्राणा पतिता मस्तकान्मय ॥ 4 5 ॥

भिथ्याधिपिणीय तयता मयां द सही ।

बह्ना लज्ञापरो भूत्वा ननाम मधुसूदनम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

शिशेन केतकी त्यथा तद्विताकुसुमेषु वै ।

Now as you have told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by Me." Brahmā was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to Viṣṇu; Mahā Deva, forsook the Ketakī flower from that date.

एवं मायाकलं विद्ये जानिनामपि मोहदूम ॥ 47 ॥

अन्येधी प्राणिनां राजन्का बाता विषभं प्रति ।

O King! Such is the power of Māyā; when need to speak of other ordinary mortals!

दैवानां कार्यसिद्धार्थ सर्वदैव सापानिः ॥ 48 ॥

दैत्यान्वड्यवते घासु त्यक्त्वा पापघर्व हरि: ।

See! Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, is self-deluded and is always deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without any fear whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby incurring.

अवतात्करो देवो नानायोभिपु माध्वः ॥ 49 ॥

त्यक्वासउनन्द्युर्दं दैत्यैयुंद्धे वैवाकारोदिषुः ।

Though He is the Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in several wombs, forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting with the

Daityas. O King! Viṣṇu is omniscient and He is the Lord of this world; specially

नूनं मायाखलं चैतन्याध्वेप्रि जगदुगृति ॥ 50 ॥

सर्वेत्रे देकताकार्थि का वातों-न्यस्य भृपते ।

He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of the Gods. Now when Māyā exercises such a powerful influence on Viṣṇu, what wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be deluded by Her?

ज्ञानिनामयि चेतांसि परमा प्रकृति: किल ॥ 51 ॥

बलादाकृष्य मोहाय प्रपछति महीपने ।

O King! That Highest Prakṛti draws away violently the hearts of the wise and drags them down into the ocean of world.

यया व्यानिद्र सर्वे भगवल्या चराबगम् ॥ 52 ॥

मोहाद्र जान्तद सेव बन्यमोक्षप्रदा सदा ।

That Omnipresent Bhagavatī is ever the cause of bondage of all when She casts Her net of delusion and She is again ever the cause of liberation when She imparts Her knowledge to them.

राजोवाच

भगवबृहि मे तस्य: खरूषं बलमुतमम् ॥ 53 ॥

उत्पत्तिकाणं चापि स्थानं परमकं च वत् ।

The King said: “O Brahma! What is the nature of Her? and what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And where is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me.

ऋरिष्टवाच

न चोत्पतिरनादित्वापुव तस्याः कदाचन ॥ 54 ॥

नित्यैव सा पा दैवी कारणानां च कारणम् ।

The Rşi said: “O King! She is beginningless; therefore She had no origin at any time; that Highest Devi is Eternal and She is always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be powerful like Her).

वर्तते सर्वभूतेषु शक्ति: सर्वात्मना नृप ॥ ५५ ॥

गववच्छक्तिहीनस्तु प्राणी भवति सर्वथा ।

O King! She resides in all the beings as the

Book V Chapter XXXIII

essential vital Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced a dead carcass.

विष्छक्ति: सर्वभूतेषु रूपे तत्यासदेव है ॥ 5 6 ॥

आविष्यवित्तोगचौते देवानां कार्यसिद्धये ।

She is pervading as the Universal Force of Consciousness in all the beings. The form of this Śakti (Force) is the form made up of consciousness itself, the Brahma. (For the force of Fire is Fire itself; it is not seen in any other form).

यदा सुवर्तीत तां देवा मनुजाश्व विशेषाने ॥ 57 ॥

प्रभुभविति भृतानां दुःखानागय चाधिक्या ।

Her appearances and disappearances at times are simply for serving the purposes of the Gods. O King! Whenever the Devas and men worship Her, Ambikā makes Her appearance visible to destroy their pains and sufferings.

नानाङपधरा देही नानाशक्तिस्मतिता ॥ 58 ॥

आतिबर्षिति कार्यार्थ स्थेच्छया परमेक्षी ।

She assumes various forms and possesses various powers. That Highest Iśvarī comes down of Her free will to serve Her some purpose or other. देवाधीना न सा देही यथा सर्वे सुरा नृर ॥ 59 ॥

न कालक्षणा नित्यं पुरुषाध्वरातिनी ।

अकतां पुरुषो रहा दूर्घं सर्वरिंदर जगत् ॥ 60 ॥

She is not like the Devas, under the control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the influence of Time (as both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts always every being to action according to his capacity. Puruṣa is not the Doer; He is simply the Witness.

दूर्यस्य जननी सेव देवी सदसद्वातिका ।

पुरुषं रंजयलेका कृत्वा बढ़ाण्डनाटकम् ॥ 61 ॥

This whole Universe is the object seen. That Devi is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She is the Manifested and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect also. She alone is the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus gives the colouring to the Puruṣa.

रॉजते पुरुषे सर्वे संहरल्पितरंहसा ।

तया निमितभपृताते ब्रदायिषणामहेक्षरा: ॥ 62 ॥

कल्पिता: सव्यकाव्येयु प्रेगता तीलात्य त्वयी ।

When the Puruṣa is coloured thus, She destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa are respectively the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the world; but this is merely a statement; really they are merely instruments in Her hands.

स्वांगे तेषु समारोष्य कृतातसे बल्वतरा: ॥ 63 ॥

दत्ताश्र शनकसदेभ्यो गीर्वेर्मीर्गिरिता सत्या ।

Bhagavati has created them in reality for Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts. She has bestowed to them Her part manifestations, i.e., Sarasvati to Brahmā, Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu, and Girijā to Maheśa and has thus rendered them more powerful.

ते तो ध्यापनि देयोगा: पुजपत्नि पर्ग मुदा ॥ 64 ॥

जात्या सर्वेश्रीं गर्जिके सृष्टिश्वितिनागरीनाय ।

एतते सर्वमाद्यातं देर्वीमाहात्ययुतमम् ।

मम बुद्धमनुसारेण नानं जानाभि भुपते ॥ 65 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीधीगानते महापुराणे पछामकल्पे

यर्षिवर्शो3यायः ॥ 133 ॥

They, the lords of the Devas, always meditate and worship Her as Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of this Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of it).

“Aim, Hrim, Klim Cāmundāyai bicche” is the (9) nine lettered mantra.

Here ends the Thirty-third Clapter of the Fifth Book on the description of the greatness of the Devi in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāpam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

CHAPTER XXXIV

On the Worship of the Devi

राजोबाच

भाववन्दूरि मे सत्यकन्या आरापने विधिम् ।

पूजारिविं च मन्योक्ष तथा होमविंधि वद ॥ १ ॥

The King said: O Bhagavan! Kindly narrate to me in detail now the methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the Mantrams that are used on such occasions.

ऋरिकवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि तस्याः पूजाविशुं शुभम् ।

कामवं मोक्षवं नृणां ज्ञानदं दुःखनारुम् ॥ 2 ॥

The Rsi said: “O King! I am now describing the method how to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and to the destruction of all miseries.

आदी सनापिधिं कृत्वा गुधि: शुकलापवो नरः ।

आचय प्रवतः कृत्वा शुभमायतनं निजम् ॥ ३ ॥

The worshipper has to perform his bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidika and Tāntrika Sandhyā; then he should, with his heart controlled, perform his Ācamana a ceremony and select a good auspicious site for his own Pūjā purposes.

ततोउलिपतभूम्यां तु संस्थायासनुभनम् ।

तत्रोपधिप्य विधिप्रवित्रचच्य मूर्यान्वतः ॥ 4 ॥

पूजाद्यैं सुसंस्थाय यथाशक्यनुसारतः ।

प्राणायमं ततः कृत्वा भूतगृद्धि विधाय च ॥ 5 ॥

कुर्णवीर्णाप्रतिशं तु संघांर प्रोक्ष्य मंत्रतः ।

काल्नानं ततः कृत्वा न्यासं कुर्णीधाविधि ॥ 6 ॥

शुभे ताममये पात्रे चन्देन सितेन च ।

यद्कोर्ण विलिखिडोत्रं चाहकोणं ततो कहि: ॥ 7 ॥

नवाक्षरस्य मनस्य बीजानि विलिखेत्ततः ।

कृत्वा चन्द्रगितईं च वेदेत्नां संविधाय च ॥ 8 ॥

अर्शा वा धातर्वी कुर्मोलुजामनैः शिक्षोदितैः ।

पूजनं पृथिवीपाल भगवल्या: प्रयन्ततः ॥ 9 ॥

कृत्वा वा विक्रियलुजामागमोक्तां समाहितः ।

जयेत्रबाक्षरं मन्त्रं सत्ततं ध्यानपूर्वकम् ॥ 10 ॥

होमं द्रशणशतः कुर्महिंशोजेन च तर्पणम् ।

भोजनं ब्राह्मणानां च तद्धशोजन कारयेत् ॥ 11 ॥

चरित्रयपाटं च नियं कुर्मीढ़िसज्वैत् ।

नवरावतं चैव विधेयं विनिपूर्वकम् ॥ 12 ॥

Next he should plaster the site with cow-dung and spread his sacred carpet (Āsana) whereon he is to take his seat with a cheerful mind and sip water for Āśamana three times. Then he is to collect the articles for worship according to his best capacity and place them duly in their respective position. He is to perform Prānāyāma (regulated his breath); and then follows the Bhūta Śuddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the celestial body and Jīva-Śuddhi by which the Sādhaka becomes the Devatāmaya; he then proceeds to Mātrkā Nyāsa (i.e., setting mentally in their several places in the six Cakras and then externally by physical action the letters of the alphabet which form the different parts of the body of the Devatā. He then places his hand on different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate Mātrkā for that part).

Bhūta-Śuddhi: Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into ether into Aharhākra, Aharhākra into Mahat and Mahat into Prakṛti, the final Cause. This process is called Bhūta-Śuddhi.

He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and make his Sankalapa; then he will have to assign to the different parts of his body the Mātṛkā Mantras duly as well as his own Mantram; next he is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different Devatās and do the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the Deity outside to be worshipped as well as within himself to be meditated and worshipped; then he is to do the same with the articals for worship and purify them

Book V Chapter XXXIV

by sprinkling with water and Astra or Phat Mantram, thus removing all sources of obstacles that are likely to interfere with the act. Next, on an auspicious copper plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled (hexagonal) figure (two triangles crossing each other with their vertices one upward and the other below) with white sandal paste or with eight perfumed things and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of eight petals; outside this he is to draw the boundary lines that is called the Bhūpura. On each of the eight petals he is to write each letter of the nine-lettered Bīja (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in the central ovum. Next by the Mantram by which breath is infused or by the Vedic Mantram he will have to place the Yantra in the proper position and then worship the Ādhāra Śakti (the Vital Force) in the central ovum and the holy seat with the Pitha Mantrams. He will have to invoke the Devi, uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate or figure and carefully worship Her by offering seats and other articles duly as enunciated in the Yāmala Tantras etc. Then he will have to perform the six-fold worship of the Ganas in the six angles and worship Indra, etc., and Vajra and others in the Bhūpura (the boundary), and thus finish the Pūjā of the Yantra. (For the Pūjā see the Prapañca Sāra.) Note.—Bhūpura is what is thought over outside front or in the beginning. Here the Gana Devatās are first thought over and worshipped. Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and out, everywhere and be free” is the motto of the worship. In the absence of the Yantra, one will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavatī and worship Her with the greatest caution with the Mantras as expounded by Śiva in the Tantrams (of Yāmalā and others). Note: Yantra is that which restrains. This human body is the Yantra. And its imitators is placed outside in various shapes and figures. The Yantra is the mystical diagram used by the dovetes for worship.—Or one may use

the Vaidika Mantrams in worshipping the Deity in accordance with the prescribed rules and with his mind controlled; then, merged in meditation, one is to mutter silently (perform the Japam of) the nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krim, Dakṣine, Kālike, Svāhā). Japam (muttering or repeating silently the Mantram) is of two kinds—Nitya (daily) and Pauraścaranik (repetition of the name of the deity accompanied with burnt offerings). In the Nitya Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in the occasional Pauraścaranik Japam, one tenth of this is offered; Abhiṣeka, too, is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpanam is one-tenth of Abhiṣeka and the feeding of the Brāhmanas is one-tenth of what is done in the Tarpanam. O King! Thus completing the Japam one is to read daily the Canḍī (do the Candīpātha) where the three glorious deeds of the Devi are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to depart to Her own place. The Navarātra Vrata (nine night vow) is next to be observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. Hrīm Mahiṣa Mardinyai Svāha is the Mantra.

अधिंचे च तथा चैवे गुर्जले पढ़े नातिप्र १

नवरायावसायों वै कर्तेल्य: शुभपिच्छता ॥ 13 ॥

In the bright fortnight of the month of Śāvin or Caitra, is to be observed the fasting of the Navarātra by those who desire for their own welfare.

होम: शुविषुतः कावोंं जयमनंः सुगवसः ।

गर्कनैरावृतमिश्री धन्युक्तैः सुसेंकृतैः ॥ 14 ॥

Homas are to be offered, many in number, and Mantrams are to be recited, the same as in one's own Mantram, good Pāyasam with sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in this ceremony.

डागमांसेन वा कायां बिल्वपरैतंस्वा शुधेः ।

द्वाराकुर्णी रेन्थिनलैवां शक्रकायुतः ॥ 15 ॥

Goat meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red Karavīra flowers or til (sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used instead in the Homa ceremony.

अध्यमं च चतुर्वयं नवम्यां च विशेषतः ।

कत्वेयं पूजनं देया ब्राह्मानां च भोजनम् ॥ 16 ॥

The special days for the worship of the Devi are the eighth, ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half month. The feeding of the Brāhmins must be done on each occasion.

निर्मीयं धन्यानोति रोगी रोगात्मुष्यने ।

अपूजी लभने पुत्राङ्छणांशे यशालनिंनः ॥ 17 ॥

O King! Thus the poor become wealthy, the diseased get cured, and the persons that have no issue get obedient and well qualified sons.

राज्यश्रो गोराज्य प्राप्नोति सावर्धीमिकम् ।

श्रविधि: यौवित्ती हृति रिर्युं मयाप्रसात्तः ॥ 18 ॥

The King, expelled from his kingdom, gets back by the grace of Mahā Māyā, dominion over the whole earth and becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he was before vanquished, when he worships the Devi.

विद्यार्थी पुर्जनं यस्तु क्रोगे तिवर्पेतिः ।

अनवहां शुभां विहां विहेंं नात्र संशयः ॥ 19 ॥

The persons, desirous of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and auspicious, provided he worships the Devi with his senses restrained.

ब्राहणः क्षिवौये कैश्यः शुत्रो वा फक्तिसंयुतः ।

पूजयेज्ञानां धात्री सर्वसैयुखाभगवेदे ।। 20 ॥

Persons of all castes, Brāhmīns, Ksatriyas, Vaiśyas or Śūdras can become masters of all pleasures and happiness provided they worship with devotion to the Devi, the Preserver of the World (the Jagaddhātri).

नवरात्रजतं कुयांत्रस्नारीणाङ्ग यः ।

वांछितं फलमाणोति सर्वदा भक्तित्यतः ॥ 21 ॥

आधिंने शुक्लपक्षे तु नवरात्रजत शुभम् ।

क्रौलिं भावसंयुक्तः सर्वां-कामानवान्युताः ॥ 22 ॥

A man or woman whoever performs the Navarātra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired fruits. Whoever celebrates the holy Navarātra ceremony in the bright fortnight of the

month of Aśvin with his heart full of the thought of the Devi, gets all his desired fruits.

विविधान्यजलं कृत्वा पूत्रास्थानं प्रकलयेत् ।

कलर्श स्थायपेतच येवदान्यविधानतः ॥ 23 ॥

O King! Now I am describing the rites and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be made according to the prescribed rules; a water jar is then to be placed on it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies.

यन्ये सुर्विरं कृत्वा स्थायपेकलशोगरि ।

वापवित्वा वर्ग्रांश्रात्याध्रश्न: परिवर्तितान् ॥ 24 ॥

One will have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava grains all around the jar.

कृत्वोपरि वितानं च पुष्पमातासमावृतम् ।

यूर्वपित्युर्वयुक्ते कत्विं चरिककारुम् ॥ 25 ॥

An awning or pandāla is to be erected over the altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated with flowers. Lights and Dhūpas, incense and perfumes are then to be used in the hall of the Candikā Devī.

त्रिकालं तत्र कतंच्या पूजा शक्तयनुसारतः ।

विशरणाक्यं न कतवं चशिककायाङ्ग पूजने ॥ 26 ॥

O King! The Devi is to be worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is to be shown in spending wealth for this purpose.

धूर्वैर्दिंष: सुनेवेधे: फलपुष्पेनकशः ।

गतिजादीः स्तोजपार्तैर्वद्यागरणैस्या ॥ 27 ॥

उत्सवस्त कत्हीयो नानावादिर्वसर्युतः ।

Light, dhūp, good presents of rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds are to be offered in this worship of the Devi; the chanting of the hymns of the Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments are to be done and a grand festivity is to be made.

कन्यकानां पूर्वनं च विधयं विधिपूर्वकम् ॥ 28 ॥

चन्द्रनेपूर्णवैलैर्भधैक्षे ध्रुवित्या ।

सुगन्धतैलागलैश मनसो कृचिकारकै: ॥ 29 ॥

Moreover, note this carefully that virgins are

Book V Chapter XXXIV

to be worshipped duly with sandal, ornaments, clothing, various edibles, sweet scented oil, and beautiful garlands. (This worship of the virgins of the virgins is one of the essentials.)

रूवं सम्पूजनं कृत्वा होंमं मन्त्रविधानतः ।

अध्यायां वा नव्यां वा कारयेढ़िपूर्वकंम् ॥ 30 ॥

Thus completing the worship of the Devi, Homa is to be done duly with Mantrams and other necessary articles on the eighth or the ninth tithi.

ब्राह्माणामोवेयश्रात्मारणं द्रगभिति ।

कर्तव्यं शक्तितो दानं देयं भक्तिरपरैपैः ॥ 31 ॥

Lastly the Brāhmins are to be fed duly; then the worshipper is to take his first meal after fasting (i.e., make pānaṃ) on the tenth day; then presents and various articles are to be offered to the Brāhmins according to one's might and with devotion.

एवं यः कुन्ते भक्ल्या नवरायजतं नरः ।

नारी वा सध्वा भक्ल्या विषया वा पतितान ॥ 32 ॥

O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste widow whoever performs thus the Navarātra Vrata gets in this world all the desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets unbounded happiness and after death goes to the highest place.

इह लोके सुखं भोगान्यापोति मनस्पेलितान् ।

देहान्ते परमं स्थानं प्रापोति ब्रतत्पर: ॥ 33 ॥

जन्मानरोप्रिकवाफिकर्मवेल्याथिवारीणि ।

जन्मोतमकुले गाय सदाचारो भवेद्रिक सः ॥ 34 ॥

And if, owing to some cause or other, he has to take his birth again in this world, he would be born in an excellent and would become endowed with good conduct and qualifications and get the unflinching devotion towards the Ambikā Devī.

नवराजत्रत प्रोक्ते ब्रतानामुत्तमं ब्रतम् ।

आराधनं शिवायास्तु सर्वसौख्यकं परम् ॥ 35 ॥

O King! I have thus described to you the rules of the Navarātra ceremony; this vow is the best of all; highest and greatest pleasures and happinesses are obtained in worshipping thus the auspicious Mahā Māyā.

अनेन विधिना राजनस्माराधय चण्डिकम् ।

बिला पिणुसखिलतं राज्यं प्राप्यस्तानुतमम् ॥ ३६ ॥

सुखं च परयं भूप देडे.प्रिमन्यगृहे पुनः ।

पुत्रदारानसामासादा तप्यसे नात्र संशयः ॥ 37 ॥

O King! Better worship Caṇḍikā duly according to the prescribed rules; then you would be able, by Her grace, to conquer all your enemies and you will regain your excellent dominion, unshaken by any, and you will get again the highest pleasure and happiness when you will be reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no doubt in this.

वैश्योतम लवेयाड़ समाराधय कामदान् ।

देवीं विश्रेष्ठशी माघा सृष्टिसंहारकारिणी ॥ 38 ॥

O Vaiśya! You, too, better worship the same Mahā Māyā, the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the fructification of all desires.

स्वजनानां च मान्यस्तं चविध्यास गृहे गतः ।

सूखं सांसारिकं प्रायय यथाभिलिविं पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

देवीलोके शुभे वासो भवित्त ते न संशयः ।

You will then be able to regain all your wordily pleasures in your own home and be respected by your relatives and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go to the holy abode of the Devi.

नाराधिता भगवती यैसेने नरकभागिनः ॥ 40 ॥

इह लोकेशितु:खालाँ नानारोर्षे: प्राणिडितः ।

There is no doubt in this. Those that do not worship the Devi, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer much from various diseases in this world.

भवन्ति मानवा राजब्धुर्विश्र घराजिताः ॥ 41 ॥

निष्कलजा हुशुजाशु रूणानीः सत्यकुद्धयः ।

Those that do not worship the Devi are always defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and sons, become stupid and suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires.

बिल्वीदतेः कार्यैरः शनपरेष्ठ चमपकैः ॥ 42 ॥

अशिता जानतां धात्री यैसेतोरनि विलासिनः ।

And those that worship the Preservix of this

world the Bel leaves, Karavīra flowers, Śatapatra and Campaka flowers, that blessed man, devoted to the Devi, gets filled with all sorts of enjoyments.

भवन्ति कृतपुण्यासे शक्तिभक्तिपरायणा: ॥ 43 ॥

घनविभवमुखाख्या मानवा मानवतः

सकलगुणागणानां भाजनं भारतीशा: ।

निर्मापतिदात्मनः: पूजिता वैभंबानी

नृपतितिलकमुख्यासे भवन्तीह लोके ॥ 44 ॥ ॥

इति शीर्द्वैभागवतो महापुराणे पत्रमस्कन्मे

वतुसिंशोरधाव: 11 34 11

O King! What more can I say than this, that

those who have worshipped the Devi Bhavānī with the Mantrams approved by the Nigama Śāstras, those very persons get honour in this world and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily, they stand foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only repositories of all the best qualities in this world.

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods of the worship of the Devi in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2017年1月1日

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

CHAPTER XXXV

On the King Suratha's Getting the Boons and on the Vaiśya Samādhi

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वय: श्रुत्वा दुःस्तिती वैश्यपार्थिवंति ।

प्रिणपत्य मुनिं प्रीत्या प्रश्रावनन्तीं प्रुगम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King! Hearing thus the Rsj’s words, the king Suratha and Vaśya, who were very distressed in their minds, became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with great humility and modesty.

इर्शणोतृष्तनयनावृतुवार्म्यकोविदी ।

कृताज्ञिलपुटी शान्ती बफित्यणचेतोर्षि ॥ २ ॥

Their eyes expressed their gladness and their hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, clever in speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address him with their folded hands.

भगव्याचितावष्ठ शान्ती दीनी शुचाचिति ।

तब सुक्सारस्वथा गड़वेव भगीरथः ॥ ३ ॥

साध्वः सभ्यवन्तीह परोयकृतितत्पराः ।

अकृकिमगुणागामः सुखद्वः सर्वदैर्वितान् ॥ ४ ॥

O Bhagavan! We were passing our days in a very humble and distressed spot; we are today purified by your good words, just as the country was entered pure by Bhagiratha when he brought down the river Ganges here.

पूर्वेण्ययुस्त्रैन प्राणतोर्यमाशय: शुभः ।

त्वावाष्प्यं महाभाग महादुःखविनाशकः ॥ 5 ॥

The saints, adorned with purely good qualities, are incessantly engaged in doing good to others and how the people can be made happy.

भवन्ति मानावा भूमौ बह्वः स्वार्थतयतः ।

परार्थसाधन दक्षा: कैकित्वसार्थ पिवारुगाः ॥ 6 ॥

O Intelligent One! Surely we have come to this auspicious Āśrama owing to our past good deeds (in previous births) and all our miseries are therefore brought to their ends today.

दुःवितोर्ध सुनिश्रे श्रेयोर्ध चातिपु:वितः ।

उभी संसारसंतनो तनाभ्रमपदे मुदा ॥ ७ ॥

There are good many persons that roam in this world for their selfish ends; very few there exist like you who are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True that I am very much distressed but this Vaśya is more distressed than me.

दर्शनाटवे हैं विद्वानां दुःखमिहावयोः ।

देहर्ज मानसं वाक्यमश्वणदेव साम्पत्न ॥ ८ ॥

Both of us, very much afflicted by the miseries of world, have come gladly to your Śārama and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by your sight; and now, hearing your words, we are relieved also of our mental pain and sufferings.

ध्यानावारां कृतकृत्यी जाती सूकिसुपारासत् ।

पाविती भवता बहु-कृपया करणणार १ १ १

O Brāhmaṇa! We are very much blessed and

Book V Chapter XXXV

our objects have been gained by your nectar-like words; O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! You have purified us, out of your unbounded mercy.

यूहाणास्मकरी साधो नय पारं भवाणीवात् ।

मनौ शंज्ञाविति ज्ञाला मन्त्रदोनेन संग्रदम् ॥ 10 ॥

We are quite tired of this world; knowing this, do you lead us beyond this world by holding our hands and by initiating us with Mantrams.

तपः कृत्यातिविषुले समायाध्य सुखप्रदाम् ।

संग्रण्य दर्शनं भूयो याच्यावो जिनजनित्रम् ॥ 11 ॥

O Best of Munis! We will first of all practise a very hard Tapasyā (asceticism) and worship Bhagavatī, the Awarder of happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our respective abodes.

वदनातल सम्राग्य देरीमन्ते नवाक्षगम् ।

स्पर्गं च करिष्यावो निर्गहारी धृततन्ते ॥ 12 ॥

Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devi from your mouth and practising the Navarātra warm we will fast and meditate on the Mantram.

Note: The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahisamardinayi Svāhā.” Instead of Om, any of the following may be used: “Hrim, Klim Aim, Strim, or Hūm mentioned in Śāradā Tilaka, Nārāyaṇī Tantra, or in Viśvasāra Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sāra).

व्यास उवाच

इति सञ्चोदितसाध्यां सुभेय मुनिसनमः ।

ददौ मन्त्र शुभं ताथ्यां ध्यानबीजुर्ज:सनम् ॥ 13 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the king and Vaiśya prayed thus to the Muni Sumedha, the best of that Munis, gave them the auspicious Mantram with its seed (Bīja) and as well what is to be meditated (Dhyāna).

तै च प्राय युनेर्मंत्र समान्य नुरुदेवतां ।

जग्मनुर्धैश्यराजानी नदीतीरमनुत्तमम् ॥ 14 ॥

On getting the Mantram (with Rsi, Chanda, seed Sakti, and Devatā) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his permission went to the holy bank of a river.

एकान्ते विजने स्थाने कृत्यासनपरिष्ठम् ।

उपविष्टी स्विगर्ज़ी तालतील कृणोदरी ॥ 15 ॥

Both of them were of delicate frames and both of them were fully determined; they went to a very solitary place and selected their place and took their seats there.

मन्त्रबाज्यती शान्ती चरित्रव्यपाठकते ।

निव्यनुर्मामेकं तु तत्र छायापरायणे ॥ 16 ॥

There they spent one month in repeating silently the Mantram and in chanting the three glorious deeds of Candī.

तयोर्मसतैनैव जाता ग्रीतिनुतमा ।

पदाम्बुजे भवान्यासु विश्या कृष्टिसत्वाणयतम् ॥ 17 ॥

In this short period of one month, they became very much attached to the lotus-feet of Bhavāni and their minds were also much pacified.

कदाचित्यादयोगीता मुनेस्तस्य महात्मनः ।

कृतप्रणामावगत्य तत्कृतछ्छ कुशासने ॥ 18 ॥

नान्यकार्यपरी क्वापि ध्युपतु: कदाचन ।

देवीध्यानपरि नित्यं जममन्त्रत सदा ॥ 19 ॥

They attended to no other business; only they used to go to the Muni once a day and bowing down before him they returned to their own seats of Kuśa grass and gave themselves up to the meditation of the Devi and always repeated silently their Matrams.

एवं जाते तदा पूर्णे तत्र संवत्सरे नृप ।

बध्ववृतः फलहारं त्वलत्वा पाणिज्ञो नृप ॥ 20 ॥

O King! One year thus passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits and subsisted on the leaves of trees.

वर्षमेकं तपस्तत्र चक्रतर्गैर्यपार्थिवी ।

गुखकपाणिजी दान्ती जपध्यानपाराणी ॥ 21 ॥

Thus engaged in meditation and asceticism they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry leaves only.

पूर्णे वर्षेयुने जाते कदाचिद्धर्नंचे च तो ।

प्राप्तः स्वपमध्ये तु भगवत्या मनोहरम् ॥ 22 ॥

O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in their dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavatī.

रक्ताम्बराशं देर्वीं चाफभूषणभूषिताम् ।

कदाप्रिवृष्णितः स्वदेपेयपण्यज्ञान्द्विक्काम। 23 ३ ॥

वीक्ष्य स्वपे व अ ती देर्वीं प्रीतिवृत्ती बभूवतुः ।

जलाहारैस्वृत्तीये तु स्विती संवलसरे तु ती ॥ 24 ॥

They were very much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambikā Devi in red robes and decorated with various ornaments. They practised tapasyā in the third year with water as their only food.

एवं वर्षत्रयं कृत्वा ततन्ती वैश्यपार्थिवी ।

चक्रतुर्ली तदा चिन्तां चिन्ते एरंगनलासली ॥ 25 ॥

Thus when they found that, after practising the tapas for three years, they could not see face to face the Devi they became very anxious to see the Devi and thought thus.

प्रत्यक्षरूपं देवना न प्राप्त शान्तिन्दं नृणाम ।

देहत्यागं कार्यिक्यो दुःस्तिधो भुगमातुर्गे ॥ 26 ॥

"When we have not been so fortunate as to see the Devi, Who art the Bestower of peace and happiness to the human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep distress and sorrow!"

इति संचित्य नमसा राजा कुण्डे चकार है ।

त्रिजोर्ण सुविर्यं सौम्यं हस्तमाजप्रमाणतः ॥ 27 ॥

संस्थाय पावकं राजा तथा श्रेयो3तीभक्रिमान्

ग्राहावासी निर्ज मांसं छिल्चा छिल्चा पुनः पुनः ॥ 28 ॥

Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful triangular Kūndā (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a fire in that pit, the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own body and offered them as oblations to the fire.

तथा वैश्योरीय दीपेजनी स्वामांस प्रापक्षिप्पताः ।

क्रीप्रेण वार्ति चापये द्वदुतुरी कृतोद्याए ॥ 29 ॥

The Vaiśa, too, then did the same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to offer their blood as oblation to the Devi.

तदा भगवती दत्ता प्रत्यक्षं दर्शनं ततोः ।

ग्रह ग्रंतििगोरद्धोती कृद्धया ती कुःवित्ती कृष्णम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Devi Bhagavatī, then, seeing then thus grieved, and that their hearts were overflowen with devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus:

श्रीद्व्यवाच

वरं वरय भो राजन् वने मनसि वांतिभान् ।

तृहा5ई तपसा तेउड घफ्नो5स त्वं मते माम ॥ 31 ॥

वैश्यं प्राह तदा देवी प्रसज्ञाई महामते ।

किं ते३भीई तद्वम्यघ्न प्राथयागु मनोपातनम् ॥ 32 ॥

“O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with your Tapasyā; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that boon.” Then She spoke to the Vaiśya: “O Highly Fortunate One! I am pleased; ask without any delay any boon; I will grant that just now.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूता वचनं रजा तामुवाच मुदावितः ।

देहि मेऊढ़ निज नराचं हतशुबर्ब वन्ता ॥ 33 ॥

तमुवाच तदा देवी गच्छ राजजिंत्र गृह्म ।

शत्रवः क्रीणतच्चाले गविष्यन्ति पराजिताः ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devi, the king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus: "O Devi! Grant me this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with my own power and that I may regain my kingdom." The Devi then spoke to him thus: "O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies are now enfeebled and will certainly be defeated.

Note: The Devi, has now withdrawn Her own power from the enemies with which they were filled before. This is the result of the real sacrifice to the Devi.

मन्थिपास्तु समागत ते पशिष्यित पादयोः ।

कुरु राज्यं मद्धापान नगरे सर्व यद्यापुकम् ॥ 35 ॥

O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate themselves before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can now go back to your city and govern your subjects happily.

कृत्वा राज्यं सुविशुतं वर्षाणामवुतं नृप ।

देहान्ते जन्य संप्राय्य सूर्याच्छ भविता मनुः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! Thus reign for Ayuta years (10,000 years) over your widely extended dominion; then when, you quit your body, you will again be born from Sūrya, and be known widely as Śavarni Manu.

Book V Chapter XXXV

यास उवाच

वैय्यस्तामयुवाविदं कृतांजलिपुटः गृषचि: ।

न मे गृहेण कार्यं वै न पुवेण धनेन वा ॥ 37 ॥

सर्वे बन्धकारं मातः स्वपलब्धशंरं सुकटम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The pure-natured Vaiśya said with folded hands: "O Devi! I have nothing to do with house, sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The house, wealth and sons, all these are so many sources of bondage to this world and are very transitory like dreams.

ज्ञान में देहि विश्वरं मोक्षदं बक्यपाराणम् ॥ 38 ॥

असारोर्स्थिश्छे संसारे मृढ़ा मज्जिति पाशाः ।

पीढ़ता: संतरीतीह तमाजेच्छलित संसृदिति ॥ 39 ॥

Therefore give me knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut asunder. Persons who are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in this ocean of world. The wise never prefer this Sarināra; therefore they can cross this world."

व्यास उवाच

तदाकर्णं महामाया वैश्यं प्रात पुरः स्थितम् ।

वैश्वयं तव जानं भविष्यति न संशयः ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, the Mahāmāyā said to the Vaiśya, that stood in front of Her thus: "O Vaiśya! No doubt you will acquire knowledge."

इति दत्वा वरं ताथ्यां तरेवितार्थीयत ।

अर्जीनं नतायां तु राजा तं मुनिसतमम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

प्राणय ह्यामास्हा गतमाय मनो दर्धे ।

Thus granting boons to them, the Devi then and there disappeared. After the Devi had disappeared, the King bowed down to the Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed a desire to go back to his kingdom.

तदैव तस्य सचिवास्त्रागाल्य नृपं प्रजाः ॥ 42 ॥

प्रणेभूर्विनयोपेतास्तमृषु: प्रांजलिस्थितः ।

राजसेन शगवः सर्वे पापाच्छ निर्हता रो ॥ 43 ॥

राज्यं निष्क्रौकं कृप कृक्व पुरमाधिस्तः ।

Just at that time all his ministers and subjects came humbly before him, bowed down to him and

standing before him with folded hands, said: "O King! Your enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they were all slain in battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city, free from any enemy and govern your subjects.

तच्छुल्चा वचनं राजा नत्वा ते मुनिसत्तमम् ॥ 44 ॥

आपच्छा निर्वेयी तत मान्धिभः परिवारिति: ।

The King, hearing thus, bowed down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his kingdom, surrounded by his ministers.

संग्राय च निजं राज्य दारात्मवजनबोधायन् ॥ 45 ॥

बुभुजे पृथिवीं सर्वां ततः सागरमेखलाम् ।

On regaining his own kingdom, wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt earth.

वैश्योर्षि ज्ञानमासादा पुक्तसर्ग: समन्तः ॥ 46 ॥

कालातिवाहनं तन मुक्तबन्धधकार है ।

तीर्थेयु विचरनायभ्यमालया गुणानथ ॥ 47 ॥

On the other hand, the Vaïsya became illumined with the Spiritual Knowledge and all his connections and attachments being completely severed, became free from all bondages. He became liberated in his life-time and travelled always from one place of pilgrimage to another and passed away his time in singing the glorious deeds of the Devi.

एतते कवितं देल्याश्रितं परमाढ़तुम् ।

आराध्यनकलापारिवरीयावद्धुपवैश्ययो: ॥ 48 ॥

दैत्यानां हननं प्रोक्ते प्रतुषांविसथा शुभः ।

O King! Thus I have described to you the most wonderful character of the Devi, what fruits were obtained by the King and the Vaiśya on their worshipping Her, how the Daityas were killed by Her and about her auspicious appearances on this earth.

एवंप्रभावा सा देवी भक्तानामभयप्रदा ॥ 49 ॥

यः शृणीति नरो निव्यमेतावल्यानुत्तमम् ।

संग्रापोति नरः सत्यं संसारसुखमद्धुतम् ॥ 50 ॥

Oh! Such is the glory of the Devi, leading to fearlessness amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this excellent pure narrative

of the Devi Bhagavatī, gets truly all the best and wonderful pleasures of this world.

ज्ञानंद मोक्षंदं चैव कीतिंदं सुखदं तथा ।

पावनं श्वणानृप्मेतदाख्यानमदूनम ।। ५। ॥

No doubt anybody who hears this wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, happiness and purity.

अर्जालायंदं नृणां सर्वोर्भमेवातून ।

धार्मिकामोक्षाणां कारणं परं मतम् ॥ ५2 ॥

The essence of all religious lies in this narration; therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa (religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to human beings.

सूत उवाच

जनमेजयेन राज्ञासौ पृष्टः सत्यवतीसूतः ।

उवाच संहितां दिव्यो न्यासः सर्वांशत्चवित् ॥ 53 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! The Maharṣī Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, versed in all the departments to him this divine Sarñhitā.

चरितं चण्डिकावास्तु शुभदैत्यवधाश्रितम् ।

कथयामास भपावान्कृष्णः काकणीको मुपिनः ।

इति व: कथितः सारः पुराणानां मुनीधारा: ॥ ५४ ॥

इति श्रीमदौबीभावतं महापुराणे3शदासाहक्वां सहितायां

पत्रकन्चे पत्रविरोधध्या: 11 35 11

व्योमांकाध्विसंच्यातः 2090 श्लोकैक्यांसेन धीमता

श्रीमद्वीभागलतस्याय पडुमकन्य इग्रितः 11 5 II

समाप्तोउं घडुमः स्कन्यः

The character of Caṇḍikā, the killing of the Daitya Sumbha, were thus narrated by the merciful Muni Veda Vyāsa. O Munis! I, too, have described to you the main points of this Purāṇa.

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving of the boons by the King

Suratha and the Vaiśya Samādhi in the

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, the Maha Purānam,

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

***