CHAPTER V

On the Dialogues of Nara Nārāyaṇa

व्यास उवाच

अथ विक यदुनेतेचन संसारोस्मिध्योतम ।

यर्मान्मारोडीहबुद्धितु कक्रिद्धवति कर्हिंधन् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O best of kings! There is no need of dwelling at length on this point; suffice to say, that in this world, are found persons very rare that are religious, and free egoism, jealousy, anger, etc.

रागदेश्वार्ते विश्वं सर्वे स्थावरजंगम् ।

आष्टे युगेपि राजेन्द्र किमष्ट्र किलदूषिते ॥ २ ॥

O king of kings! Even in the Satya Yuga, the Golden age, this world, moving and unmoving, was covered with feelings of jealousy and anger. What to say in this Kali Yuga (Dark Age)! (There is no wonder that this world would be full of these vicious things.)

देवा: सेव्यांश सहोहाण्डलकर्मरता: सदा ।

मानुपाणां तिरक्षां च का वातां नृप गणयते ॥ 3 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O best of kings! When the Devas are deceitful, jealous, and filled with feelings of anger, what is to be said with human beings and other lower creations!

ग्रैहोर प्रेहरो पर्वेदिति समानता ।

अग्रौहिण तथा शान्ते विहेषः खलता स्मृता ॥ 4 ॥

O Lord of the Earth! It is natural, that injury be inflicted on those persons that commit injury; but when peaceful person, void of any enmity, are injured, that is certainly an act wicked and mischievous.

यः कश्रितापसः शान्तो जपध्यानपरायणः ।

भवेतन्य जपे विद्यकर्ता वे मघवा पत् ॥ 5 ॥

Whenever, any devout ascetic, calm and quiet, is engaged in prayer and meditation, and silent muttering of one's martrams, the king of the Immortals throws hindrance in his asceticism. (This is certainly a mischievous act.)

सर्ता सत्यगुं सश्रात्सर्वदैवावर्ता कति: ।

मध्यमो मध्यमानां तु क्रियायोगी युगे स्मृती ॥ 6 ॥

(Holy, unholy and mixed persons exist in all the yugas). To those that are holy, all the yugas are the Satya yuga; to the unholy ones, always it is the Kali yuga (Dark age); and to the mixed ones, always it is Tretā and Dvāpara.

कीक्षित्दाचिद्वलिति सत्यधारुनतैकः ।

अन्यधारुव्ययुगानों से वर्से धर्मपरायण: ॥ 7 ॥

You will very seldom find a few persons, following really the True Religion; otherwise, you would have found all the persons in the different yugas religious, appropriate to those yugas.

यासना कारणं राजनसर्विकं धर्मवैस्थिति ।

तस्यां वे मतिनयां तु धर्मोषि मतिनो घबेत् ॥ ८ ॥

O king! In all cases where the conservation of religions and religious affairs are concerned, know that the original wish and desire is the cause. If this desire be impure and sullied, religion becomes also sullied; for, verily, this impurity in one's desire is one's cause of ruin in every respect. (Therefore the impure desires are never to be cherished and indulged.)

मतिना वासना सर्व विनाश्योति सर्वथा ।

बहाणणे हदयाज्ञातः पुत्रो धर्म इति स्मृतः ॥ 9 ॥

A son, named Dharma, was born of the heart of Brahmā; he was devoted to Brahmajñāna (the knowledge of Brahma), truthful, and always engaged in rites and ceremonies and in accordance with the Vedic religion.

बहाणण: सत्यस्म्यजो वेदधार्मतः सदा ।

दक्षस्य दुहिताएं हिं घृता द्रग महात्मना ॥ 10 ॥

This high souled Muni Dharma was a householder and married duly, according to the proper procedure, to the ten daughters of Dakṣa Prajāpati.

विवहाविधिता सम्यकः मुनिना गृहधारिण।

तास्वजीजनयतुज्ञान्यं: सत्यवर्ता बर: ॥ 11  ॥

This Dharma, the foremost amongst the followers of truth, impregnated them and had four sons, named respectively Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Nara, and Nārāyaṇa.

हरिं कृष्ण नरं चैदा तथा नारायणं नृप ।

योगाध्यासराते निवर्ध दीर: कृष्णो बभूव हु ॥ १२ ॥

Hari and Kṛṣṇa, amongst the four, used to remain always in the practising of the yoga.

नस्नारायणी चैव चेसुत्सप उतनम् ।

प्रातेल्यार्टि समायान तीर्थे बदरीकाभ्ये ॥ १३ ॥

Nara and Nārāyana came over to the Himālayan mountains and, in the hermitage of Badarikā, commenced the difficult religious asceticism and penance.

तपविस्तु ध्रुर्णी ती पुराणी भुनिसन्ती ।

गृणांती तस्यं बढ़ा गंगाया विपुले तदे ॥ 14 ॥

The foremost of the ascetics, those two ancient Munis, began to recite that highest mantra of Para Brahma, the Gāyatrī, on the wide spacious bank of the Ganges.

हरेंडेशी स्थिती तत्र ननतारायणावृषी ।

पूर्णं वर्षसहसं तु चक्राते तप उतमम् ॥ 15 ॥

The two Rṣis named Nara and Nārāyaṇa, born of Hari's Anīsa, practised excellent tapasyā for full one thousand years.

Book IV Chapter V

तापितं च जगत्सर्वे तपसा सचाराचरम् ।

नरनारायणायचं च शक्र: क्षीभं तदा ययौ ॥ १ ६ ॥

The whole Universe, moving and unmoving, became hot through the Fire of their Tapas. Indra became also perplexed.

चिन्ताविहः सहस्वाक्षो मनसा समकल्ययत् ।

कि कत्वं धधपुत्रो तापसी ध्यानसंयुत् ॥ १७ ॥

सिद्धार्थी सुयुणं श्रेष्ठमानं नो ग्रहीधानः ।

विज्ञ: कर्थ प्रकर्तैल्यतपो येन भवेत्र हि ॥ 18 ॥

The thousandeyed Indra became anxious, and thought within himself thus: What is to be done now? These two sons of Dharma are practising Tapas and are in meditation. If they succeed, they can occupy my excellent seat in Heaven; how can I break their Tapasyā and what steps shall I take to hinder them.

उत्पाद कामं क्रोधं च लोभे जयातिर्दारभम्।

इत्थिद्रियसहख्रशः समाकृह गजोतनम् ॥ १९ ॥

विधन्कामस्तु तत्सा जगाम गन्धमादनम् ।

गत्वा तजामे पुण्ये तावयश्यच्छतकुः ॥ 20 ॥

Lust, anger, and insurmountable avarice Indra brought into existence and, intent on hindering their tapasyā, mounted on the elephant Airāvata, went quickly to the hill Gandhamādana, and approaching the holy hermitage, saw the two ancient Rsis.

तस्मा दीनदोहै तु भात्मकाविव कोदिति ।

ब्रहाविष्यु किमेती वे प्रकटो व विभावसु ॥ २ १ ॥

धार्पुरावृष्टि तृती तस्या किं कारित्यः ।

Their bodies were incandescent by Tapasyā, as if they were the two rising Suns. Were they Brahmā, Viṣṇu manifested there or were they the two shining sources of light? These two Rsis were the sons of Dharma. What would they do with their Tapasyā?

इति संघित्य ती दूद्या तृतीवाच श्रवीपिति: ॥ 22 ॥

किं वां कार्य महागभी कृतं धर्मसुती किल ।

ददामि वां वरं श्रेष्ठ दातुं यातोउम्यदूमपी ॥ 23 ॥

अंदयमायि दास्यामि तुहोउम्मि तपसा किल ।

Thinking thus, the lord of Śacī seeing them addressed thus: “O highly fortunate ones! O two Rṣis the sons of Dharma! Please tell me what are your objects? I have come here to give thee excellent boons; I am very pleased with your Tapasyā; therefore ask boons of me; and even if they be not worth-giving, I will give them to you.

व्यास उवाच

एवं पुन: पुनः शक्रस्तावुवाय पुन: स्थितः ॥ 24 ॥

नोचृतनाडुर्षी ट्यानसंसिंधनों दृढ़वेतसौ ।

ततो वे मोहिनी मायां चकार भयदां वृषः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: The Rsis were deeply immersed in meditation and seemed very firm and resolute; they, therefore, did not reply anything, though Indra, standing before them, repeatedly urged them to ask boons from him. Seeing this, the king of the Immortals began to terrify them with his supernatural enchanting fearful māyic powers.

युकान्सित्रांश व्याखांश सुस्यावाश्रविभीयम् ।

वर्षे वातं तथा वाईंस सुमुभावा चुन: पुनः ॥ 26 ॥

He created lions, tigers, wolves and other murderous animals and began to terrify the two Rsis with them; Indra also produced rains, hurricanes and fires very frequently so that they might yield.

भीष्यामास तौ शक्रो मायांं कृत्वा विमोहित्रीम् ।

भयतो2पि वर्ष नीती न तो धर्मेतुती मुनी ॥ 27 ॥

नरनारायणी दृष्टव शक्र स्वभवं नगः ।

In spite of Indra's attempt to terrify them by his wonderful Māyā, the two Munis, Nara Nārāyaṇa, the two sons of Dharma, could not be brought under his control. And Indra returned to his own place.

बरदाने प्रतुळ्ही न न भीति वहिवायुतः ॥ 28 ॥

व्याप्सिंहादिपि: क्रान्ती चलिता नाश्रमात्सक्त।।

न तत्योधानिभां वे कृतं कोर्पि क्षमोअपवत् ॥ 29 ॥

इन्होपि सदनं गत्वा चिंतयामास दु:खितः ।

चलिता भवलोगमथां नेगो मुनिवरोगमे ॥ 30 ॥

चिन्तपनो महाविद्यामादिशानिकं स्मातनीम् ।

ईशर्ती संलोकानां पर्ग प्रकृतिमद्धुतान् ॥ 31 ॥

ध्यातचत कः क्षमो लोके बहुभगवादिवदुतः ।

And he became very sorry and thought thus:

"These two Munis could not be tempted away with boons, nor did they fly away from their place of worship, though terrified with fire, wind, wolves, tigers and lions. No one, I think, would be able to break their meditai on. When fear and temptations have not distracted their meditation, they are certainly meditating on the Eternal Mahā Vidyā Śri Bhuvanesvari, the Prime Force of Nature, the Source of all Māyās, and the Goddess the Creatrix of all the worlds, the wonderful highest Prakrti; what other expert in creating Māyā there can be? Who can break their meditation!

यमूल्ना: सकल्पा माया देवासुरुक्ताः किन्ति ॥ ३२ ॥

ते कंबं वाधितुं शक्ता ध्यायिते गतकल्यपाः ।

Indeed! how can this whole host of Māyā that are created by Gods and Asuras overpower those purged of all their sins, who are meditating their Creator, the Supreme Māyā, that Illusion by which one considers the unreal Universe as really existent and as distinct from the Supreme Spirit, whence the Gods and Asuras have derived all their supernatural powers.

वार्थकी कामकीवं च मायाकीं तथैव च ॥ ३३ ॥

त्रिते यस्य भवेते नु वायितुं कोर्पि न क्षमः।

He in whose heart reign the seed mantras of Vāk, Kāma and Māyā, (called Vāgbjām, Kāmabjām, Māyābjām, no one is able to stand against and overpower him.

मायया मोहितः शक्रो भूयस्तस्य प्रतिक्रियम् ॥ 34 ॥

कर्तुं कामवस्तौ तु समातुयावबीद्धचः ।

मनोभववसंतेन रत्वा युक्तो बजाउनु ॥ 35 ॥

अभ्वतोषिः: समायुक्तस्तसा गन्धभावन् ।

O king! Indra, enchanted by Māyā, did not desist from tempting the two Rṣis, but he went on thinking other means by which their asceticism could be baffled and asked Kāma and Vasantā (the god of Lust and the srpiug season) to come before him and addressed them, thus: "O Kāma! You now be united with your wife Rati and Vasantā (the God of spring) and go to the hill Gandhamādaṇa,

accompanied by all the Apsarās (celestial damsels) and with all the Rasas (love sentiments).

Note: The Gandhamādaṇa is mountain like unsurpassable intoxicating happiness of the senses.

नरनावायणी तत्र पुराणाप्रियस्तनो Ⅱ 36 Ⅱ

कुरुस्तत्प एकान्ते स्थिती बद्रिकाओंमे ।

गत्वा तत्र सर्वीये तु तयोर्नम्ब्व मार्गेणि: Ⅱ 37 Ⅱ

वित्तं कामातुंरं कार्यं कुरु कार्यं मायामुंना ।

There you will find the two ancient excellent Rsis Nara and Nārāyana practising asceticism in solitude, in the hermitage of Badarikā. O Manamatha! You better go before them, and with the influence of your arrows, do now my work and make hearts extremely lustful.

मोह्यित्योच्चार्यित्या विजिगढ़ेताउवायु च ॥ 38 ॥

वशीकृक महाभाग मुनी धर्मेतुरावि ।

O Furtunate One! Charm over them by means of your arrows, make them leave their asceticism by magical spells.

को ह्यास्मिनसंसंसारे देवो दैत्योज्य मानवः ॥ 39 ॥

यस्ते बाणवर्ग प्राप्तो न याति भूगतादितः ।

Who is there in this world of Devas, Daityas, human beings, that, being whipped by your arrows, do not come under your control?

ब्रह्मार्ति गिरितानावश्छंत्रे बहिंदियमितिः ॥ ४० ॥

गणना कॉन्वोः काम त्वबुणानं पराकमे ।

When Brahmā, I, Mahādeva, Moon and Fire are all fascinated by your arrows, then is there any doubt that these two Rṣis would not be fascinated by them!

वारांगनागणोर्धं ते सहायार्थं मवेरितः ॥ 4 1 ॥

आगमिष्यति तत्रैव रभ्यादीनां मनोरमः ।

I am sending these public women as your assistants. Rambhā and other beautiful celestial nymphs would all follow you.

एका तितोतमा रभ्या कार्ये साधायिं श्रम ॥ 42 ॥

त्यमेवैकः श्रमः कामं चित्रितैः कर्तु संशयः।

You alone, or Rambhā or Tilottamā alone can do this work. Will there be any doubt if you all unite in this?

Book IV Chapter VI

कुरु कार्य महाभाग ददामि तव वार्षिछतम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

O Good One! Do this work for me; I will confer on you your desired objects.

प्रलोभिती मवास्तवर्ध वरदानैस्तपस्थिति ।

स्थानात्र चलिती शांतीं वृचायउं मे ततः श्रभः ॥ 4 4 ॥

O Manmatha! I tempted them with boons but these two ascetics, of controlled minds, could not be displaced from their seat. My efforts were rendered useless.

तथा वे भायया कृत्वा भीषिति तापसौ भूणम् ।

तथापि नोत्थिती स्थानाहेहरक्षापरे न तो ॥ 4 5 ॥

I frightened them very much with all the Māyic powers; yet they could not be dislocated from their deep thoughts. It seems that they are quite heedless in the preservation of their bodies.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा जाक्र प्राप्त मानोषवः ।

वासवादु कार्यवामि कार्य ते मनसोषितम् ॥ 46 ॥

Vyāsa said: Kāmadeva, on hearing the king of the Devas, addressed him thus: "O Indra! To day I will fulfill all your desires.

यदि विज्युं महेशं वा ब्रह्माणं वा दिवाकमम् ।

ध्यार्वती तौ तद्धउसाकं भवित्तीरा वर्गी मुनी ॥ 47 ॥

But there is one word. If these two ascetics be meditating Viṣṇu, Śiva or Brahmā or the Sun, then I will bring them under my control.

देवीभर्ते वर्गीकर्तूं नाहं शरकः कर्णचन ।

कामारां महावीजं चिन्तयन्तं मनस्यलम् ॥ 48 ॥

And if they be meditating on the Great Seed Mantra, the root of all Māyā, and the great Kāmabījam, the king of the Kāma, I will never be able to subdue such a devotee of the Highest Devi. तां देवीं चेम्हागर्जिति संश्रिती भक्तिभावतः ।

न तदा मम बाणानां गोचरी ताप्पसे किकल ॥ ४ ९ ॥

If these two ascetics have devotedly taken refuge of the Great Power Mahā Devi, then they will not come under the sight of my arrows."

इन्द्र उवाच

गच्छ त्वं च महाभाग सर्वस्तत्र समुभृतेः ।

कार्य मापातितुःसाध्ये कर्ता हितमनुतमम् ॥ 50 ॥

Indra said: “O Blessed One! Go now with your assistants, ready to do your work. Nobody but you, I find, that can fulfill my this beneficial, though very difficult work.”

व्यास उवाच

इति तेन समाधिदा ययु: सर्वे मयुधाताः ।

यत्र ती धर्मपुत्री द्वै तेपाते उप्करं तपः ॥ 51 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणो चतुर्भिकल्भे

पत्रमो5याय ॥ 52 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus ordered by Indra, they all departed to where the Dharma's sons Nara, and Nārāyana were performing their hard Tapasyās.

Here ends the Filth Chapter in the Fourth Book of

Śrimadkevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of

18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter VI

