CHAPTER XVII

On the Continuance of Bhrgu Family

जननेजय उवाच

कर्षे ताश तिज्यः सर्वा धूगूणां कुःखासगात् ।

मुक्ते वंश: पुनसेवां बाह्याणानां तिथ्यो:पवत् ॥ 1 ॥

Janamejaya said: Munis! How did the Bhārgava wives cross this endless sea of troubles and how

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

was the family of Bhrgu re-established on the surface of this earth?

हहदीः किं कृतं कार्यं हृत्वा तान्बाहाणानपि ।

क्षप्रिवैलीभसंयुक्ते: पापाचारैर्वदेस्व तत् ॥२ ॥

And what did the greedy Haihayas, the vilest of the Kṣatriyas, do after they killed the Bhārgavas? Describe all these in detail and satisfy my curiosity.

न तृत्तिरिति मे ब्रह्मपिबतरते कथापनुम् ।

पादनं शुभदं नृणां परलोके फलप्रदम् ॥ 3 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of austerities! I am not satisfied with the drink of your nectar-like words, very holy and leading to happiness in this world and to good merits in the next.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि कक्षां पापप्रणाशिनीम् ।

यथा स्थित्युता भुक्ता दुव्रातन्यादुल्ययात् ॥ 4 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I will now narrate to you the sin destroying virtuous story how the Bhārgava wives crossed their great hardships and the ocean of troubles, very difficult to cross.

भूगुपन्यो यदा राजन्टिम्बन्ते भिरीं गताः ।

भयत्रसता विभनागा हृद्धे: पीडिता भृणम् ॥ 5 ॥

The Bhārgava wives, when they were very much harassed by the Haihayas, went to the Himālayas, overwhelmed with terror and disappointment.

गौरिं तत सुसंस्थाय पृभ्मवीं सतितस्ते ।

उदोषणपराधकुनिश्रयं मरणं प्रति ॥ 6 ॥

There on that mountain they erected an earthen image of Śri Gauri Devi by the banks of the Ganges and worshipped Her and, firmly resolved to die, began to fast.

स्वने गत्वा तदा देयी प्राह ताः प्रमदोत्तमाः ।

युभातु मध्ये कस्याधिछ्धविता चोकतः पुभान् ॥ ७ ॥

The Devi Jagadambikā appeared to those religious women in their dreams and said: "A son will be born of My essence to one of you from one of her thighs; that son will redress all your wants."

मद्राशगतिस्त्रिभ्रप्र: स वः कार्य विधायस्ति ।

इत्यादिश्य परांवां सा पशुधात्नहिताउभवत् ॥ 8 ॥

जागृतास्तु ततः सर्वा मुद्यापुर्वरंगनाः ।

कार्धितसां भयोहिता कामिनी चतुत भृणम् ॥ 9 ॥

दधारा चोरणीकेन नर्ष सा कुलवृद्धये ।

पलायनपरा दृष्टा क्षतिवेब्जिहाणी यदा ॥ 10 ॥

Thus speaking, the Devi Bhagavati disappeared. Those women when they woke up were very glad; one of them that appeared very clever, becoming very much anxious out of the fear of the Kṣatriyas,

preserved the foetus in one of her thighs for the propagation of the family. Her body become luminous; she then fled, overwhelmed with terror. विहूला तेजसा वुक्ता तदा ते दुडवुर्भुंग ।

गृहातां बध्यतां नारी सभार्य वाति सक्ता ॥ 11 ॥

The Kṣatriyas, seeing that Brāhmaṇī, came quickly upon her and said: "See! This pregnant Bhārgava wife is flying away hastily; size her and take away her life."

इति बुवंत: सम्पाता: कामिनी खड्यापणयः ।

सा भयातां तु तान्यद्वा करोद समुपगानत् ॥ 12 ॥

Thus saying, all of them raised their axes, and pursued her. Then that woman seeing them coming, wept out of fear.

गर्भस्य त्रक्षणार्थ सा चुकोशातिभयातुग्र ।

रुदती मातरं शुत्वा दीनों प्राणविजर्जितम् ॥ 13 ॥

नित्यारां कंदयानां क्षत्रियेंशुशतायितम् ।

गृहीतायिति सिंहेन् सभार्थी हरिणी यथा ॥ 14 ॥

साशुनैजां वेयमानां संकुळ्य बालकस्तदा ।

भित्चोते निर्जनामागु गर्भे: सूरं इवापर: ॥ 15 ॥

She cried, out of terror, for the preservation of the child in her womb; and the child seeing her mother helpless and distressed, trembling with fear and with tears in her eyes having no one to protect her and awfully oppressed by the Kṣatriyas as if a pregnant deer has been attacked by a lion and is crying about, angrily burst out of the thigh of his mother, and quickly came out like a second Sun.

मुखान्द्रशीः क्षिवरणां जेजसः बालकः शुभः ।

दर्जान्जातकस्यागु सर्वे जाता विलेचान्चः ॥ 16 ॥

बधभुपर्गितिरुपिंगे जन्माधा इव क्षिवसाः ।

That good looking boy took away the power of

Book VI Chapter XVII

sight of those Kṣatriyas by his brilliant lustrous light; so sooner the Haihayas saw that boy than they got blind.

चिततं मनसा सर्वैः किमेत्तदिति साम्पतम् ॥ 17 ॥

सर्वे चशुर्दिवीना यज्ञाताः स्म बालदर्शनात् ।

ब्राह्मणास्तु प्रभावो3यं सतीततबलं मह्न ॥ 18 ॥

Like those that are born blind; they then began to roam in the caves of mountains and thought within themselves, what an evil turn of Fate had overtaken them! They thought thus: "Oh! The mere sight of that boy has turned us blind; what a great wonder is this! Certainly this is due the influence of the Brāhminī wife; this is, no doubt, the great effect of her virtue of chastity.

शणाढ़ा मोषसङ्कूला: किं कार्थिन्त दुःखिता: ।

इति सझित्य मनसा नेत्रहीना नितशया: ॥ १९ ॥

We have greatly oppressed the Bhārgava women. They have become very sorry and distressed; now we cannot tell what more evils do these women, of true resolve, inflict on us?"

बाहुपति ग्रणरो जगमूर्हिया गतचेतनस: ।

प्रणेमुस्तां भयवस्तां कृताझतिपुराधुत अ ते 20 ॥

कच्छौंनीं भयोद्धिना वृत्यर्थं ब्रह्मियर्षभाः ।

प्रसीद सुभगे मातः सेवकातसे वयं किल्च । २१ । ॥

कृतापराधा रंभोक क्रसिया: पायबुद्धयः ।

Thus pondering, those Ksatriyas deprived of their eyes, helpless, and their minds bewildered, took refuge of those Brāhmin ladies. The ladies, seeing them again come, were the more terrified; but those Ksatriyas bowed down before them with folded hands for the restoration of their sights and said: "O Mother! We are your servants. Be gracious unto us. O Auspicious Ones! We are vicious Ksatriyas; O Mother! What an amount of offence we have committed to you. O Beautiful Ones! We have become blind, no sooner we have seen you.

रूर्पान्तव तन्वीग जाता: सर्वे विलोजना: ॥ 22 ॥

मुखं ते नैव पर्यामो जन्मांदा इयं भामिति ।

अबुतु ते तपोर्वीव किं कुर्म: पापाकाशिण: ॥ 23 ॥

अगर्ण ते प्रपत्रा: सभे देहि चक्षिंय मानदे ।

O Angry Ones! No more we can see your lotus-like faces, as if we are born blind; O Mother! The spirit of your asceticism is so very wonderful! We are sinners; therefore by no means we can get our sight; therefore we have taken refuge unto you all; better give us back our eyesight and preserve our honour.

अभ्यतं मरणागुर्ग कृपां कर्तू ल्याईसि ॥ 24 ॥

पुनर्दिष्णवानेन सेवकान्धसियान्कृत ।

उपरम्य च गच्छेम सहिताः पापकर्मणः ॥ 25 ॥

अतः परं न कतव्यापीरुंगं कर्म कर्हिंति ।

भार्यावणां तु सर्वेशं सेवकाः स्यो वयं किल ॥ 26 ॥

O Mother! Blindness is more dreadful than death; therefore do you show your mercy on us. Be pleased unto us and restore our eyesights and make us your slaves; no sooner we get back our sights, we will cease from these vicious acts and go to our homes. In future, we will never commit such heinous acts; from today we all become servants of the Bhārgavas and we will serve them.

अज्ञानाकृष्टा पार्थ श्रंलवं तत्वायधुना ।

वैरं नात परं स्वायि भपुर्णिभः श्रंलियः सह ॥ 27 ॥

Forgive all our sins that we committed unconsciously; we promise that, in future, there will no more be any enmity between the Bhārgavas and Kṣatriyas.

कर्तेब्यं रणधेः सभ्यवर्तित्वयं तु हेतुवेः ।

सपुत्रा भव सुशोण प्रपाता: सभे वर्ध चे ते ॥ 28 ॥

प्रसादं कुक कल्याणि न द्विष्याम: कदाचन ।

O good-looking Ones! You pass your days happily with your sons; we ever bow down before you. O Auspicious Ones! Be graciously pleased unto us; no more we will cherish any inimical feelings towards you.

व्यास उवाच

इति तेशं वचः श्रुत्वा ब्राह्मणी विस्मयान्वित्त ॥ 29 ॥

तानाह प्रणतानुः:स्थानाश्रास्य गतलोचनान् ।

गृहीता न यया इष्टिकुंभाक़ क्षत्रियाः क्रिति ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Bhārgava lady heard their words and was thunderstruck and seeing those

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Kṣatriyas bowing down before her, blind and distressed, consoled them and said: "O Kṣatriyas I have not taken away your sights nor am I displeased in any way with you.

नाहं क्षापित्ता सत्यं कारणं श्यूलात्य यत् ।

अयं च भागीवो नृन्मूक्न: कृपितोउघ चः ॥ 31 ॥

चक्षुर्य तेन युवाके सन्धिभातिन कश्वात ।

स्वधिर्वित्त राज्ञाला गर्भेयावगीय क्षिवरेः ॥ 32 ॥

अनासो घोमपरांस्तायसाध्नकायया ।

गर्भानिय वया यूयं भृगृश्चिन्तु पुकाः ॥ 33 ॥

Now hear what is real cause. This child of Bhārgava, born of my thigh, is exceedingly angry towards you and has therefore made your eyesight still and to no purpose. For the greed of wealth, you have slain the close relatives of this boy, those that were quite innocent and virtuous ascetics and you have slain their children that were in their mother's wombs; this boy come to know all those things.

तदार्यमूषणा गर्भों मया वर्षेगतं धृत: ।

पडंगश्राजिलो वेदो गृहीतोउनेन चोजना ॥ 34 ॥

O children! When you were slaying the children of the Bhārgavas in their mothers' wombs, I then bore within my thighs this child for one hundred years.

गर्भेत्यनायि बालेने घुण्यांशिवबुद्दे ।

सोर्पि पितृवतधान्नं कौधेघौं हेतुमिच्छति ॥ 35 ॥

This son of mine though as yet in the womb has mastered all the Vedas within so very short a time for the propagation of the Bhārgava clan.

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन जातोउं यम बालकाः ।

तेजसा यस्य दिव्येन चधूर्षि युभितिन च ॥ 36 ॥

तस्मातैर्व सूत मेउदा याचर्ये तिवन्यातिवा: ।

प्रधिपातेन तुहोउसी दृष्टि वः प्रतिमोक्षिति ॥ 37 ॥

Now this Bhārgava son is infuriated with anger for your slaying his father and is now ready to kill you all. My son! Whose divine effulgence has destroyed your eyesights, is born in grace of the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavatī Bhuvanesāvari; therefore do not consider this boy as an ordinary

being. Now bow down with humility before this my son Auryva (born from the thighs); this son may be pleased by your bowing down and may retire your you eyesight.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छृत्वा वचनं तत्या हैहयात्तुद्वृक्ष तम् ।

प्रणेपुर्विच्योपेता ऊकर्ने भुविसतमम् ॥ 38 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Brāhmim lady, the Haihayas began to praise the boy with hymns. With great humility, they bowed down to the best of the Munis, born of the thighs.

स सन्तुषी बक्याला तानुगाव चिवक्षुपः ।

गळ्छशं स्वगृहान्युपा मामाखानकृतं वचः ॥ 39 ॥

अवर्यभाधियभालते भवन्ति देवनिर्मिताः ।

नात्र शोकस्तु कतिथ्वः पुकर्णे विज्ञानता ॥ 40 ॥

The Rşi Aurvya, then, became pleased and spoke thus to the Haihayas who were deprived of their eyesight: "Better go back to your own homes. O Kings! And read these following words derived from my this story.

पूर्ववद्धुरेष्य: सर्वे प्राप्नवन्तु यथासुखम् ।

जर्जु वियातक्रीधा भवन्ति यथासुखम् ॥ 41 ॥

Whatever is inevitable and created by the hands of gods must come to pass. Knowing this, no one ought to be sorrowful on any such matters.

इति तेन समादिष्ठ हृदयाः प्राप्तलोचना: ।

ओरीबाभंग्रय जपमुते सदन्तिन यथासचि ॥ 42 ॥

बाहाणी ते सुत दिव्यं गृहीचा स्वामयं नात ।

पालयामास भूपाल तेजबिचनमतन्त्रित ॥ 43 ॥

Let you all regain your eyesight as before and forego your anger and go to your own homes respectively at your own will. Let the Rşis, too, get peace and happiness as before." When the Maharṣi Aurva ordered thus, the Haihayas got back their eyesight and went at their leisure to their own homes, on the other hand the Brāhimin lady went to her own hermitage, with her Divine-spirited child and began to nourish him.

एवं ते क्रियतं राजन्यगृणा तु विनाशनम् ।

लोपाधिष्टेः क्षत्रियेश्य न्यकृतं पातक किलि ॥ 44 ॥

Book VI Chapter XVII

O King! Thus I have described to you the story of the killing of the Bhārgavas and how the Kṣatriyas, actuated by greed, did so very vicious acts.

जनमेव जयात

शुतं मया महतकर्म क्षत्रियाणां च दाक्णम् ।

कारणं लोभ एवात्र दुःखद्धीयभोसृतः सः ॥ 4 5 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Ascetic! Hearing this exceedingly heart-rending act of the Kṣatriyas, I come to know, that greed is the sole cause of it and both the parties had suffered so much, simply out of this insatiable greed.

किंचिन्युभिह्छायि संशयं वासरीसुत ।

हैहवासे तकं नाना छलाता भुवि नृपातकनः ॥ 46 ॥

O King of Munis! I want to ask you one more question in regard to this point. How the sons of the Kings came to be known Haihayas in this world?

यदोसु याद्वा: कामं भरतद्वभरातसक्षा ।

हैहयः कोर्पि राजाउभूतेभां योग प्रतिक्ति: ॥ 47 ॥

Amongst the Kṣatriyas, some are called Yādavas for they were descended from the family of Yadu; some were known as Bhārata, for they were descended from Bharata.

तद्रं श्रोत्थिच्छामि कारणं कर्णानिये ।

हैहयासे कंब जाता: श्रियाय: केन कर्मणा ॥ 48 ॥

But was come king named Haikhayas born before in their family or were they known as such on account of other actions? I desire to hear of it. Kindly describe this to me and oblige.

हैहयानां समुत्पति शृणं भूप सविस्तरान् ।

पुरातनां सुपुणयं च कवां पापप्रणाशिनीम् ॥ 49 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! I am describing in detail to you of the origin of the Haithayas. Hear. The sins are destroyed and the merits accure on hearing this story.

कस्मिंश्रित्यमये भृप सूर्यपुः सुशोभनः ।

रंवेतीत च विद्यालोत रूपव्यानमितुर्षः ॥ 50 ॥

उन्यैः श्रवसामकहा ह्यन्तं मनोहर्म ।

जगाम विद्यासुदर्ने वैकुण्ट भार्करात्मजः ॥ 51 ॥

भगवद्धर्नाकांक्षी ह्यास्कडो यद्यानतः ।

हन्यस्तु तदा द्रुही लक्ष्याजी रचिनन्दनः ॥ 52 ॥

O King! Once on a time Revanta, the son of the Sun, very beautiful and of boundless lustre, was going to Viṣṇu in Vaikuntha, mounted on the beautiful Ucaisārvā, the jewel of the horses. When he was going on horseback with a desire to see the God Viṣṇu, the Goddess Lakṣmī saw that child of the Sun.

रमा वीक्ष्य हर्ष दिख्यं घातरं सागरो.द्वयम् ।

रूपेण विमिता तस्य तस्यी सर्पिततोचना ॥ 53 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī, born out of the churning of the ocean, on looking at the beautiful appearance of her brother Horse, also born out of the churning of the ocean, became very much astonished and steadily gazed on him.

भगवानपि तं दूद्वा ह्यास्कं मनोहम ।

आगच्छतं रां बिणुः पुरच्छ प्रणायातपुः ॥ ५४ ॥

को3प्रभायाति चार्विकृ ह्यास्के इवापरः ।

स्मरतेजसन्तुः कान्ते मोह्यन्ति भुवन्त्रयम् ॥ ५५ ॥

The Bhagavān Viṣṇu, capable to show both favour and disfavour, saw the beautiful Revanta, of good figure, coming on horseback; and lovingly asked Lakṣmī: “O Beautiful One! Who is coming here on horseback, as it were, enchanting to the three worlds!”

प्रेक्षमाणा तदा लक्ष्मीतचित्चता दैवयोगतः ।

नेावच वचनं किंचिन्यूहापि च पुनः पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

At that time, the Goddess Lakṣmī was accidentally looking intently on the horse; so she did not reply, though repeatedly asked by the Bhagavān.

व्यास उवाच

अशस्तभर्ति वीक्ष्य कामिनीमितिगोहताम ।

पर्यंर्ती परमप्रेमा चझुलाईं च चझुलाम ॥ 57 ॥

The Lakṣmī Devī, always restless, was very much intent on the horse and was enchanted and She was looking steadily with great affection on the horse.

तामास भपावानुकूदः किं पयसि सुलोचने ।

मोहिता च हरिं दूर्व्या पूर्ण तैवाधिभायसे ॥ 58 ॥

Seeing this, the Bhagavān became angry and said: "O Beautiful-eyed One! What you are looking at so intently?

स्वयं तमसे यस्माद्रमा तस्माद्वित्यति ।

चढ़लत्वाच्छलतेचेयं सर्वैधैव न संशय: ॥ 59 ॥

प्राकृता च यथा नारी नूनं भवति चंचला ।

तथा तथामी कल्याणि स्थिति येन वक्तवान् ॥ 60 ॥

Are you so much enchanted with the sight of the horse that you are not speaking to me a single word, though I am repeatedly asking you so often! You lovingly dwell on all the objects; hence your name is Rama; your mind is also very restless, therefore you would be known as Cañcalā Devi (the restless Devi). O Auspicious One! You are restless like ordinary women; you can never stay steadily for a certain time at any one place.

तं हं दयं तस्मीपत्था समीक्ष्य यदि मोहिता ।

वड्वा भव ब्यामोक मत्वलोकें.निदाड़णो ॥ ६ १ ॥

While sitting before Me, you are enchanted with the sight of a horse; then you be born as a mare in that world of men, full of dreadful troubles, on the surface of the earth."

शूनि शला तया देवी हरिणा दैवयोगत ।

रोटि वेघमाना सा भयभीताउतिच्छि ॥ 62 ॥

The Goddess Lakṣmī became very much affrightened at the sudden curse given by Hari, a matter as it were ordained by the Devas, and began to cry aloud, shuddering with pain and sorrows.

तमुवाच स्यानार्थ शाङ्गुता चाह्ताक्षिति ।

प्राणम्य शिरसा देर्वे स्वपर्ति विनयान्यिता ॥ 6 3 ॥

देवदेव जगत्राथ करणाकर केवार ।

Laksmī Devi, then of sweet smiles, frightened, bowed down with great humility to her own lord Nārāyaṇa and said thus: "O Deva of the Devas! O Govinda! You are the Lord of this world and the Ocean of mercy.

स्वल्पप्रपायो गोविन्द कस्माच्छायं ददात्मे में ॥ 64 ॥

न कदाचित्यमाय गृहः क्रीधरते हीगुणः प्रभो ।

कव गतस्ते मयि नेहः सहजी ने तु नधरः ॥ 65 ॥

O Keśava! Why have you inflicted on me so dreadful a curse for such a minor fault of mine! O Lord! I never saw you before so very angry; Alas! Where has now gone that affection, so natural and undying, that you showed towards me!

वज़पातनसु जगत्री वै कतवीयो न सुडुजनें ।

सदारड़ं वरयोग्यां ते शापयोग्या कबं कृत्ति ॥ 66 ॥

O Lord! It is not proper to hurl a thunderbolt on one's own relations; but it is advisable to cast it on the enemies.

प्राणांस्त्व्यामि गोविन्द प्रप्यतोउघ ताव्यातः ।

कर्थ जीवे त्वया हीना विरहान्तन्तातिपा ॥ 67 ॥

प्रसादं कुरु देवेशु शापाद्यमासूल्याफाणत ।

कंदा भुक्ता समीयं ते प्राप्नोमि सुखदं विभो ॥ 68 ॥

I am always fit for receiving boons from you. Why have you made me now an object, fit for curse. O Govinda! I will quit this life in your presence. I will never be able to live, separated from You. O Lord! Be graciously pleased and say when shall I be free this dreadful curse and regain Your happy companion?

हरिकाव

यदा ते भविता पुत्र: पृथिव्यां मस्मय: प्रिये ।

तदा मां प्राय तद्वीये भुविता त्वं भविष्यां ॥ 6 9 ॥

इति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पुर्वरूब्ये

सावदशीउवायः ॥ 70 ॥ 

The Bhagavān said: 'O Devi! When you will get a son in the world like me, you will no doubt come again to be my companion.

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the continuance of the family of Bhgru in the Sixth Book in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharsi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter XVIII

