CHAPTER XXII

On Selling Harisćandra's Wife

व्यास उवाच

स तया नोष्टामान्तु राजा पल्प्या पुनः पुनः ।

प्राह भई क्रोपोय्य चिवकयं ते सुनिष्टुणः ॥ १ ॥

नृशंसीरपि यत्कर्तु न शक्यं तत्करोम्यहम् ।

यदि ते भाजते वाणी वतृभीद्बसुनिव्युम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the Queen Mādhavī requested repeatedly the King, He said: "O Good-Auspicious One! When you have not met with any scruple to utter clearly these harsh and cruel words, I will do that act now which the most ruthless persons do not dare to do.

एवमुक्लवा ततो राजा नाचा नागरमातुः ।

अवतार्य तदा रोगे तां भार्याँ नृपसत्तभः ॥ ३ ॥

वायामाद्रकण्डस्तु ततो वचनमब्रवीत् ।

भो भो नागरिका: सर्वे शुणुध्यं चर्चनं मा ॥ ४ ॥

Saying this, the King went with his wife, very distressed, to the city. Placing her on the public road, the King cried out in a voice choked with feelings and eyes full of tears: "O Citizens! Hear you all. Do any one of you require any maid-servant?

कस्यचिद्धादि कार्य स्याहास्या प्राणोष्टया मन ।

स ब्जीतु त्वायतुची यावत्सं धार्यायम्हमू ॥ 5 ॥

तेउबुब्यपिडता: कस्त्वे पर्नी विक्रेतुभागतः ।

This lady is dearer to me than my life. If any of you be able to offer price of her as I will declare, then let him give it out quickly." The Pandits then said: "Who are you? Why are you come here to sell your wife?"

राजोवाच

किं मां पृष्छथ करत्वं भो नृशंसोहममानुष: ॥ 6 ॥

गढ़सी वार्जिस कठिनस्ततः पापं करोभ्यमू।

The King said: “Are you asking me of my introduction? Hearthen: I am a heartless brute and not fit to be called a man; or I am a Rāksasa; nay, I am more than that; I am prepared to do this sinful act.”

व्यास उवाच

तं शब्दं सहसा शुचा कौशिको विग्रहपधूक् ॥ 7 ॥

युद्धलयं समाधाय श्रिंश्रत्यभाषत ।

समर्पयस्य मे दासीमहं केता धनपूदः ॥ 8 ॥

अस्ति मे वित्तमतुलं सुकुमारी च मे प्रिया ।

गृहकर्म ने शक्योति कतृम्यमात्रच्छ मे ॥ 9 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Kauśika suddenly assumed the form of an old man and came out atā spoke to Hariścandra: “I am master of boundless wealth; so I am able to give you the money you want; I am ready to purchase the maidservant by giving an equivalent wealth. Better give me the maidservant.

अर्ह गृह्मीय दासीं तु काति दास्यामि ते धनम् ।

एवमुक्ते तु विश्रण हरिश्रान्य भुपते: ॥ 10 ॥

विद्यौर्ण तु मनो दुःखात्र चैन किंकितदायित् ।

My wife is exceedingly delicate; she is unable to do all the household work; so let me have the maid. But say quickly what value am I to pay?" When the Brāhmin spoke this, Hariścandra felt his heart, as it were, torn asunder; so he could not for the moment speak anything.

Book VII Chapter XXII

विष्य उवाच

कर्मण्ड्य वेयोरूपशीलानां तव योचितः ॥ १ १ ॥

अनुक्पादिं वित्त गृहाणाये मेउलालम ।

धर्मोगतेषु यदूद्धुं तिजयो मौल्ये नरस च ॥ १ २ ॥

द्विश्रिललक्षणोपेता दक्षा शीलनुणान्विता ।

कोटिमील्यं सुवर्णस्य तिजयः पुंसलतावृष्टिन् ॥ १ ३ ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said: “Take an equivalent amount of money according to the age, beauty, qualifications and capabilities of your wife and hand her over to me. Hear about the prices of the male and female servants as written in the Dharma a Śāstras: The price of a female servant clever, good, well-qualified and possessing thirty-two auspicious qualities is one Koti gold mohurs; and the male servant similarly qualified fetches one Arbuda gold mohurs.”

इत्याकर्ण वंचलस्य हरिङ्गज्ञे महीपति: ।

दुःखेन महात्रियहो न चैन किंचिद्वबवित् ॥ 14 ॥

ततः स विगो नृपते: पुरातो बल्कलोपरि ।

धर्न निताया केशेषु धुत्वा राजीमकर्षेत् ॥ 15 ॥

Hariscandra became very much pained to hear the Brāhmīn speaking thus; but he could not say anything. The Brāhmīn then placed in front of the King the money over a bark and caught hold of the hair of the Queen and was ready to drag Her.

राज्यवाच

मुंच मुंचार्य मां सही यावत्यश्यामर्थे सुतम् ।

दुर्लंभे दर्शन विध प्रपत्रस्य पविष्यति ॥ 16 ॥

पर्यहे पुरु मोर्मेव मारतं दायरतां गताम् ।

मां माम्याश्री राजपुत्र न सूष्यासई त्वायाउ्धून ॥ 17 ॥

ततः स बालः सहसा दूद्वा कहां तु माततः ।

समप्यधावद्येति. वदन्माशुवितोचनः ॥ 18 ॥

The Queen said: “O Ārya! Let me see once the lotus-face of my son; leave me once. O Brāhimin! Please see that it will be hard for me again to see this boy. O Son! Behold! Your mother is now a slave. So, Prince, do not touch me. I am not fit now to be touched by you. The boy, then, seeing the mother suddenly snatched away, cried out “O

Mother! O Mother!" and followed her with tears in his eyes.

हृते वक्षं समाकर्ध-काकपक्षधरः सखल्न ।

तमागतं द्विजः कोधादुलमध्याहनत्तदा ॥ १९ ॥

वदंतसाधपि सोःयेति नैव मुबुक्ति मात्तम् ।

That boy tumbled at every step still he caught hold of the mother's clothing by his hand and began to accompany her. The Brāhmīn, seeing this behaviour of the boy, became impatient with anger and began to beat him. Still the boy wept, saying, Mother! Mother! and never quitted the hold of his mother.

राज्यवाच

प्रसादं कुक मे नाव क्षिणीचेमं हि वाकाम्का ॥ 20 ॥

क्रीतापि नाहं घचिता विवैनं कार्यसाधिका ।

इल्थं मामल्यभायाया: प्रसादं कुक मे प्रभो ॥ 21 ॥

The Queen said: "O Lord! Have mercy on me and purchase this boy also. Though you are purchasing me, yet without this boy I will not be able to do your work. My fate is bad; therefore this calamity has happened. Shew this favour to me.

वाहाण उवाच

गृह्धातं चितमेत्ते दीयतां मम वाकालः ।

स्तीपुंसो धर्मशास्त्रजैः कृतमेव हिं वेतनम् ॥ 22 ॥

शर्ते सहसं लक्षं च कोटिपोल्थं तथापरेः ।

द्वार्जिलतक्षणोपेता दक्षा शीलगुणान्विता ॥ 23 ॥

कोटीपोल्थे स्थितः प्रोक्तं पुचस्य तथातर्भुम् ।

"The Brāhmaṃ said: Take this money and give me the boy too. For the Wise in the Dharma Śāstras fix such to be the prices of a female and a male. The other Pandits make differences in the prices, e.g., one hundred, one thousand, one lakh, one crore and so on, according to the different qualifications. But for the female, who is skilled in all actions modest, of good behaviour, and well qualified and, on whose body the thirty-two auspicious signs are seen, her price is one Koti gold mohurs and for a man qualified, once Arbuda gold mohurs.

Śrimaddevibhagavatam

सूत उवाच

तथैव तस्य तहितं पुरः खिलं पटे पुनः ॥ 24 ॥

प्रगृह्ठ बालकं मात्रा सहैकस्थमबन्यन्त् ।

Sūta said: O King! The Brāhmin then gave over the price of the boy as decided, in gold mohurs in front of the King over a bark and then tied both the mother and son.

प्रतस्थे स गृहं क्षिप्र तथा सह मुखास्थितः ॥ 2 5 ॥

प्रदक्षिणु तु सा कृत्वा जानुभयं प्रगत स्थित ।

बाष्ययर्गेकूल दीना तिवंदं बचनवम्बबीत् ॥ 26 ॥

यदि दर्तं यदि हृतं ब्राह्मणातर्पिता यदि ।

तेन पुर्णेय ने भर्ती हरिश्रूरेजस्तु वै पुनः ॥ 27 ॥

He, then, gladly and without any delay, carried them to his home. At the time of departure, the Queen circumambulated the King and, kneeling down, bowed down to him and, in that state of humility, began to speak: "If ever I have done any charities, if ever I have poured oblations on the Fire, if ever I have satisfied the Brāhmins, then, by that virtue, Hariścandra will again be my husband."

पदयोः पतितां द्वृदा प्राणेध्योर्पि गरीयसीम् ।

हाहेति च वद्वाजा बिललापाकुलैन्द्रिया ॥ 28 ॥

विद्युक्तेयं कंवं जाता सत्यशिलगुणान्विता ।

यूबच्छायाउपि यूबं तं न जातीत कदाचन ॥ 29 ॥

Seeing his wife, dearer then his life, fallen on his feet, the King became very distracted and lamented, crying “Alas! Alas! The shadow of a tree never leaves the tree; but you being verily modest and endowed with all qualifications, are now separated from me.”

एवं भाषी वहित्वा5थ सुसंवेब्धे परस्यम् ।

पूत्र च तनुयाचेदे मां लवे हित्वा क्र यास्यसि । 30 ॥

Speaking thus reasonably with his wife, the King said to his son: "O Child! Where will you go, leaving me here?

कां दिवां प्रति यास्यामि को मे दुःखं चिवायेत् ।

राज्यलायो ने मे दुःखं चलवासे न मे दुःखं ॥ 31 ॥

वत्पूत्रेण विल्योगो मे एवमाह स प्रपृति: ।

Where shall I go now? and who will stop my miseries? The King, then, spoke to the Brāhimin:

“O Brāhim! The pain that I experience in the separation from my son, I did not feel on the occasion of quitting my kingdom or on my being exiled in a forest.”

सद्धुरीभ्याय हि सदा लोके भाग्यां भविति हि ॥ 32 ॥

मया त्यक्ताप्रस कल्याणि दुःखेन विविधोबितता।

इद्वाकुकंशसम्भूतं सर्वेनाज्यसुवोचिनम् ॥ 33 ॥

मामीद्धरो पतिं प्राय्य दासीभावं तला हुसि ।

“O Auspicious One! The husband, good natured in this world, nourishes always his wife and keeps her always in comfort and happiness. But I am such a bad husband of yours, as I have left you and made you float in the sea of sorrows, Born in the Iksyāku family, I inherited the kingdom and its pleasures; but, Alas! Your getting such a husband has now been reduced to slavery!

इनुगो मज्जमानं मां सुमहचोकारमारे ॥ 34 ॥

को मापुढ़रते देखे पीर्णाण्ड्वयान्धितरंः ।

O Devi! I am merged in this ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating this ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating this story of the Purāṇas!"

सूत जयाच

प्ययतस्तस्य तार्जरें: कशापाते: सुदारुकर्णे: ॥ 35 ॥

घातविचा तु विघ्रोगे नेतुं समुपचक्रमे ।

Sūta said: O King! The Brāhmīn, then, began to take away the queen and the boy, whipping them, in the face of the King.

नीयमानी तु तो दूर्वा भार्थियुगे स पार्थिवः ॥ 36 ॥

बिलतपालितु:खातिं नि: श्वर्योषां पुतः पुनः।

Seeing his wife and son being dragged away in that state, the King's pain knew no bounds and be frequently sighed and sighed and bitterly wept aloud.

यां न वायुर्गे वास्डविद्यो न चउने न पृथकजना: ॥ 37 ॥

दूर्धवतः पुरा पर्नीं सेयं दासीत्यमानात ।

सुर्वंक्षीरप्रमुक्तोर्गे सुकुमाराकरांगृति: ॥ 38 ॥

संग्रापो विक्रयं बालो चिछ्याममसु सुर्भर्तिमम् ।

Alas! My dear wife, whom the Moon, the Sun, Wind or any other body could not see ere this, has

Book VII Chapter XXII

become now reduced to slavery today! Oh! How beautiful and gentle are the fingers of my child? He has been sold off to-day, being born in the Solar Dynasty? Alas! Fie on my foolish understanding!

हा प्रिये हा शिशो वल मामानार्थवर दुनंवः ॥ ३ ९ ॥

देवाधीदान्शा प्राणो न पृतोरंभि तथापि चिक् ।

Oh my Dear! Oh my child Rohitāśva! Your this wretched condition is due to my Anāyra irrespective bad maxims! Oh! Through the mockery of the Daiva, I have got this distress! Fie on Me!

सृत उवाच

एवं वलिपणो राजो3प्र विशोधेनतरपीयत ॥ 40 ॥

वृक्षगोहाविधिस्तुगैस्तावाद्य त्वरान्वतः ।

अयानंतर मुनिवेशुस्त्वाजगाम महातपाः ॥ 41 ॥

सशिष्यः कीशिकन्नोउसी निशुः कूरवर्गनः ।

Vyāsa said: The King was lamenting thus when the Brāhimn disappeared with them, in the very tall trees and walls of palatial buildings. At this time the cruel fiendish Muni, endowed with great power of asceticism came there quickly, accompanied by his disciples.

विश्रामित्र उवाच

या तयोक्ता पुरा राजनाराज्यस्य दक्षिणा ॥ 4 2 ॥

तां ददस्य महाबाहो यदि सत्यं पुरस्कृतम् ।

Vísvāmitra said: “O One of mighty arm! If you think it your duty to respect Truth, then pay me the Dakṣinā of Rājasūya sacrifice that you promised before.”

हरिश्रत्र उवाच

नमस्क्तोम राजर्ष गृहाणेमां स्वदक्षिणम् ॥ 4 3 ॥

राजसूयस्य यागस्य सा यमोक्ति पुरानंत्रय ।

Hariścandra said: “O Rājarsī! I bow down to Thee. O Sinless One! Now take the Dakṣinā of the Rājasūya Sacrifice that I promised to pay you before.”

विश्वामित्र उवाच

कृती लक्ष्मीद्रं उद्यं दक्षिणार्थ प्रदीयते ॥ 44 ॥

एतदाचक्ष्व तजेन्द्र यथा उद्यं त्वयाजतिन् ।

Viśvāmitra said: "O King! Whence have you

collected these gold Mohurs that you are now paying me as my Dakṣinā. How have you earned this? Say."

राजोवाच

किम्नेन भहागभ कथितेन तवानघ ॥ 4 5 ॥

गोकस्तु वधौने विश्र शुनेनानेन सुत्रत ।

Harīścandra said: "O Dvija! O Sinless One! What use is there in telling this to you. It will increase agony by hearing O One of good vows."

ऋषिकवाच

अशगतं नैव गृह्ठामि शनमेव प्रयच्छ मे ॥ 46 ॥

इध्यसायानं राजकव्यस्य यथातथम् ।

Víśvāmitra said: “I won’t accept money earned not rightly. Give what you have acquired by rightful means. Say truly how you have acquired it.”

राजोत्ता

मया देखी तु सा भार्यं विक्रीता कोटिसामितः ॥ 47 ॥

निषेक: पुत्रो रोहितोख्यो विक्रीतोउबुदंसख्याय ।

विश्रैकाद्य कोट्यास्तं सुवर्णस्य गृहाण मे ॥ 48 ॥

Harísćandra spoke: “O Brāhmīn! I have sold my wife the Devi Mādhavī for one kotī gold mohurs and my son for ten kotīs of gold mohurs. So take this eleven Kotī Gold Mohurs from me.”

सूत उवाच

तिद्धां स्वल्यमालक्ष्य दारविक्रियसभ्यम्बम् ।

शोकाधिपूर्ति राजानं कुपितः कौशिकोउर्वतीं ॥ 49 ॥

Sūta said: Seeing the gold collected out to the sale of wife and son very small, and seeing the King overpowered with pain and sorrow, Kauśika angrily spoke:

त्रहिषकार्य

राजसूयस्य नृत्रस्य नैषा भवति दक्षिणा ।

अन्यदुन्याद्य हिंग्धं मम्पूर्णं वेन सा भवेत् ॥ 50 ॥

क्षत्रवन्धो मेमांगं त्वं सरुषी यदि दक्षिणाम् ।

मन्यसे तर्हि तक्षिंषं पर्य त्वं मे परं बतम् ॥ 51 ॥

तपसोउस्य सुतालस्य ब्राह्मणस्यात्मस्य च ।

मघृषावास्य चोप्रय सुब्द्रस्याध्ययनस्य च ॥ 52 ॥

"O King! The Dakṣinā of the Rājasīya Sacrifice

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

cannot be so small; so collect quickly other money to complete it. O Vilest of Kṣaṭtrīyas! If you think this much to be proper for me, see first the enormous power of mine that I possess of my tapasyā, practised duly of my pure Brāḥmaṇaṇhood, of my violent power and of my chaste study and then you can pay my Dakṣinā.”

राजोबाच

अन्यदास्यामि भगव-काल: क्रश्रित्रीभ्यताम् ।

अभूर्वोयाति विक्रीता पत्नी पुरुषं बालकः ॥ ५३ ॥

Hariścandra said: "O Bhagavan! I have sold just now my wife; and so wait for some time and I will collect more gold and will pay that to you."

विश्रामिक उवाच

चतुर्भागः स्थितो योउं दिवस्यस्य नाराधिप ।

एष एव प्रतीक्ष्यो मे वक्त्वयं नोरर्त तव्या ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीर्षागवते महापुराणे सतमककन्धे

द्विश्चितोश्वाय: 11 22 11

Vísvāmitra said: "O King The fourth part of the day is now remaining; I will wait till then. After this you won't expect any other reply from me."

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the selling of Harisācandra's wife in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam,

of 18,000 verses, by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

