CHAPTER XVIII

On the Devi Earth's Going to the Heavens

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजन्यव्यायीम कृष्णायच चरितं महत् ।

अततारकारणं चैव देद्याश्रितमद्धुतम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hear in detail the complete life and the deeds in the in carnation of Śri Kṛṣṇa and also the various wonderful achievements by the Goddess of this universe.

धरैकवा भगत्माना रुदती चातिकर्शिता ।

गोक्पधारिणी दीना शीतागघळितविष्टघम् ॥ 2 ॥

Once on a time, the Earth was very much overburdened by the load of wicked kings and She was therefore very much afraid. She then assumed the appearance of a cow and went to the Devaloka crying and very much dejected.

पृष्ठा शेक्न कि तेउघ वर्तेतं भयमित्यव ।

केन वे पीक्षितास्ति त्वं किं ते दुःखं वसुर्पे ॥ ३ ॥

Indra, the lord of the Devas, asked him, O Vasundhare! What is the cause of your fear now? Who has troubled you? What afflictions are you merged in? Please tell me these.

तच्छुचेला ततोवाच शुणु देवेश मेउखिलम् ।

दुःखें पृष्ठसि यचनं च भाराकात्तास्मि मानद ॥ 4 ॥

On hearing Indra's words, the Earth exclaimed: O Respect giver! When You have asked me, I am explaining to you the cause of all my afflictions and sorrows; at present I am overburdened with too much load.

जरासंधो महापापी माफांधे पतिमां ।

शिशुपाललसा चेधः काशीराजः प्रतपावन्त् ॥ 5 ॥

रुक्मी च बलवाक्मो रन्त्रक महावल: ।

शाल्वः सौभपाति: कूर केशी धेनुकवलकों ॥ 6 ॥

सर्वे धर्मविह्नीव्रा परस्पतिवर्धिति: ।

पाणचारा मदोभस्ता: कालत्काप्रा पार्थिवा: ॥ 7 ॥

तैर्हं पीडिता शक्र भागकानानक्षमा विशो ।

किं कंजीम वयं गच्छामि चिन्ता मे महती चिह्ना ॥ 8 ॥

Now is reigning in the earth Jarāsandha, the king of Magadha, a very very vicious persons. Thus the other Śiśupāla, the lord of the Cedis, the uncontrollable Kāśirāja, Rukmī, the powerful Karīsa, the strong Naraka, the Saubhapati Śāiva, the wicked Keśī, Dhenuka, and Vatsaka all these

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

are now in royal positions. O Lord of the Devas! These kings are all devoid of the least trace of virtue, quarrelsome against each other, infatuated with vanity, and addicted to vicious deeds. These have become kings as if they were personified Yamas, the Lords of Death, and are constantly troubling me. I am now unable to carry their loads; where shall I go now? This great thought is constantly ailing me.

पीडिताई वर्गेह ज्यव्हिणा प्रभविष्याना ।

ग्रक जानीहि हरिणा दुःखादुःखतरं गता ॥ 9 ॥

याताङं दुर्भेदैलेन कश्यपस्यात्मजेन वै ।

हताउं हिरण्याक्षेण मगना तस्मिन्महाणर्वे ॥ 10 ॥

तदा सुकररूपेण विद्याना नित्तोउपसरी ।

उद्धताउं वरोहण स्थापिति हि स्थिता कृता ॥ 11 ॥

O Vasava! What to tell! The Bhagavān in His Boar Incarnation is the cause of all these my afflictions; O Indra! These present troubles I am fallen into only through Him; for when the cruel Daitya Hiranyāksa; the son of Kaśyapa stole me away and drowned me in the great ocean, then it was Viṣṇu in his Boar incarnation that killed him and rescued me from the ocean and then kept me in this my stable position.

नोदेशमातले स्वस्था सित्ता नया सुखगाथिति ।

न शताउम्पद्ध देवेश भारं चोबुं तुरातनम् ॥ 12 ॥

Had he not then lifted me up, I would have rested safe in the depths of Rasātala; O Lord of the Devas! Now I am quite unable to bear the load of these vicious persons.

अउे तुः: समापाति ह्राद्विक्षतशा कलिः ।

तदारूं पीक्षिता श्रक्र गतानोरम्याशु सातालन् ॥ 13 ॥

O Surendra! The vicious twenty eight Kali is coming quickly in front. Thinking of His influence, it seems to me that I will be very troubled then and will have to go down to Rasātala.

तस्माचं देवेदेशेण दुःखरूपणीवस्य च ।

पारदो भव भार मे हर पार्दो नमामि ते ॥ १४ ॥

Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! I am bowing down before Your feet, Kindly relieve me of my burden and save me from these endless troubles.

इन खाव

इले किं ते कारोम्प्यत बढ़ाणां शरणां ज्ञ ।

अर्ह ततागमिष्यामि स ते दुःखं हरिष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

Indra said: O Earth! I can not do anything for you. You better go and take refuge of Brahmā. I am also going to Him. He will remove all your troubles.

तच्छूता त्वरिता पृथ्वी ब्रह्मलोकं गता तदा ।

गहानीय पुड़तः प्राप्तः सर्वदेवपुरःसरः ॥ 16 ॥

Hearing Indra's words the Earth hurriedly went to the realm of Brahmā and Indra and all the other Devas followed Her; and all reached the Brahmaloka.

सुरभीमगतां तत्र दृष्टीवाच प्रजापति: ।

महीं जाता महात्राज ध्यानेन समुपस्थितिम् ॥ 17 ॥

कस्मातुवृति कल्याणि किं ते दुःखं वदायुम् ।

पीडिताउपि च केन त्व पाचावारेण भवेद् ॥ 18 ॥

O King! The Grand Father Brahmā saw the Earth coming to him and through the power of meditation, found out the cause of Her coming and said: O Auspicious One! why are you crying? What troubles You have now? What wicked person has given You troubles.

प्रोताच

कलिरायाति दुर्भोर्ग विषयेमि तद्वायादरुम् ।

पाणाचाताः प्रजास्तत्र भविष्यन्ति जनतन्ते ॥ 19 ॥

The Earth said: O Lord of the Earth! The vicious Kali is coming before; under Its influence the subjects will be horribly vicious; therefore I am very much afraid of this Kali.

राजानछ्छा दुराचाराः परस्यरिवीरोधिनः ।

चौराकर्मरतः सर्वे ग्रहसाः पूर्णवैरिणः ॥ 20 ॥

In the beginning of this Kali Yuga, the ancient enemies, the Asuras have now incarnated on this earth as kings. They will be extremely wicked, quarreling against each other, and will be clever in stealing others things. There is no doubt in these.

तान्हत्वा नृपतीभारं हर मेध्ध पितामह ।

पीडितास्तिम महाराज सैन्यभरणे भूभुताम् ॥ 21 ॥

Book IV Chapter XVIII

O Grand Father! Now kill these vicious kings and relieve my burden. O Lord! I am very much troubled by the armies of these kings.

ब्रशोवाच

नाहं शक्तसधा देयि भारावतरणे तव ।

गच्छाव: सर्वनं विशाणेदैवद्वेस्य चक्रिण: ॥  2 2 ॥

Brahmā said: O Goddess! I, too, am unable like Indra to remove your lad. Let us go to that Viṣṇu, the Holder of the disc.

स ते भारपानेदों वै कतियिति जनादनैः ।

पूर्वं मयापि ते कार्य चिन्तितं सुविचारये च। ॥ 23 ॥

तत्र गच्छ सुरप्रेक्षि यत्र देवो जनादनैः ।

That Janārdana will remove your burden. I thought of this well before and settled what to do.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चा वेदकर्तोंसी पुरकृत्य सुरांश गाम ॥ 24 ॥

जगाम विणुसन्दर्भ हंसाक्छक्षतुर्भुखः ।

नुहाव वेदवाक्येधि भक्तिप्रवणमानसः ॥ 25 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the four faced Brahmā, the Author of the Vedas, rode on His Hamsa Vehicle taking in front the Goddess Earth; and the Devas went to Viṣṇu and began to praise Viṣṇu Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas, with the words of the Vedas with full devotion.

ब्रह्मोवाच

सहसशीर्षत्वमीर सहसाधः सहसघात् ।

चं वेदुपुभः पूर्वे देवदेवः सनातनः ॥ 26 ॥

Brahmā said: Thou hast thousand heads, thousand faces, thousand feet. Thou art the Purusa of the Vedas, Thou art the Deva of the Devas, and Thou art Eternal.

भूतपूर्वे भविष्यच्च वर्तमानं च यद्धिणो ।

अमरत्वं तथा दत्तमसाकं च रमापते ॥ 27 ॥

O Omnipresent! Thou art the Past, Present, and Future! O Lord of Lakṣmī! Thou hast awarded immortality unto us.

एलावामहिता रेउसित को न येति जगत्ये ।

तवं कर्तांप्रयिता हर्तों तवं सर्वगतिरीश्रः ॥ 28 ॥

Thou art the Creator of universe, the Preserver

and the Destroyer; Thou art the One and the Only goal and thou art the God. Every body knows that all these glories belong to Thec.

यात्र उवाच

इतीक्षितः प्रभृविंषुः प्रसजो गकडधज्ञः ।

दर्शनं च ददौ तेभ्यो ब्रहामिष्यो मतलागयः ॥ 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Brahmā praised thus, Viṣṇu whose sign was Garuda, was highly pleased and appeared before Brahmā and the other Devas.

पप्रच्छ स्वागतं देदायमत्रवदनो हरि: ।

ततस्वागनने तेषां कारणं च सचितस्तम् ॥ 30 ॥

The Bhagavān asked them about their welfare and enquired in detail into the cause of their arrival there.

तमुवाचाबजी नत्वा धागुःखं च संस्मन्त् ।

भारात्वरणं विद्यो कर्तव्यं ते जनादेन ॥ 31 ॥

Brahmā them bowed down to Him and, remembering the cause of the sorrows of the Goddess Earth, said: O Lord! Thou art now to relieve the burden of the Earth.

भूवि धृत्वाउतरां त्वं द्वारपाने समापते ।

हत्वा दुहाधुगनुखां हर भारं द्वानिधे ॥ 32 ॥

O Thou, Ocean of mercy! When the end of the Dvāpara yuga will come Thou art to incarnate in the world and kill the wicked kings and thus to relieve the burden of the Earth.

विष्णुकाव

नाहं स्वतन्य एवात्र न बहा न शिवतशा ।

नेन्ट्रोसिनं यमस्तद्धा न सुयों वक्रणतशा ॥ 33 ॥

योगमावावशे सर्वीमिंट स्वावरजुकम् ।

ब्रह्मादित्वापयन्ते प्रथितं गुणयुक्तः ॥ 34 ॥

Viṣṇu said: I am not independent in these matters; why I? Brahmā Maheśa, Indra, Agni, Yama, Viśvakarmā, the Sun and Varuna and other Devas, no body is independent. This whole universe, moving and unmoving is existing under the control of the Yoga Māyā; and from Brahmā up to the clot of grass, all are strung into the thread of Her Three qualities.

यथा सा सैच्छया पूर्व कर्तूमिच्छति सुठत ।

तथा कातीत सहिता वयं सर्वैपि तद्गशः ॥ 3 5 ॥

O One of good vows! Whatever that Yoga Māyā, the Supreme Goddess, Who is All will, Whose mouth is inward, Who does good at all times, what she wills She does that at any time. You should all know that we are entirely under Her control.

यद्रहं स्वां स्वतन्त्रो वै विंतानु पिधा किल ।

कृतोउपबं मत्थवपुः कच्छणे या महापर्णे ॥ ३६ ॥

तिर्ययोगिषुकोभोग:काक्लीति:किंसुवं पुनः।

किं पुण्यं किं फलं तत श्रुवयोगिनतासय मे ॥ 37 ॥

You better think that were I independent, what for would I have stayed in the great ocean, incarnating in the Fish and Tortoise Bodies? O Brahmin! What name or pleasure is there in enjoyment in the body of lower animals! What holy merit or any other reward may I expect from being born in the wombs of lower animals?

कोलीवास्य तुसिंहो वा वामनोवासभवं कृतः।

अमदनिमुन्तः कमलास्पधवेयं पितामह ॥ 38 ॥

What is the reason that I assume the body of a Boar? or of a Man-Lion? or of a Dwarf? Why was I born as the son of Jamadagni. Especially why did I, being born of that high-souled Brāhmin Jamadagni, and being the best of the Brāhmins, do the most atrocious act like that of a heartless brute and fill up the lakes with their blood.

नूरुर्सं वा कवं कर्म कृतलावन्मि भूतले ।

क्षनजैसु हृदास्वान्मूरयेवं कवं पुनः ॥ 39 ॥

तत्कवं जमदानेश्ठ पुत्रो भूत्वा द्विजोतभः ।

क्षरियान्हतलानाजी निर्दोयो भर्गेभगनपि ॥ 40 ॥

Alas! I killed the Ksatriyas mercilessly; to say nothing more than that I killed the sons that were then in the wombs. Were I independent, what for I would have done these horrible and cruel deeds! O Lord of the Devas! See again.

रामो भूत्वाथ देवेन्द्र प्राविशड़ंडके वनम् ।

प्रदातिक्षीरवासघ जटावकल्बानपूनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

In my Rāma incarnation I roamed on foot,

helpless and without any provision, in the fearful Dandaka forest unfrequented by any body, wearing clotted hair, bark, rags, like a man who feels no shame, and behaved like a hunter and killed many animals.

असहायो हुपाधयो भीषणे निर्जने बने ।

कुर्वेत्राखेदकं तत्र व्यचरं वियगतप्रः ॥ 42 ॥

न ज्ञातावमूगं हिंमे मायया चिहास्तसदा ।

उठजे जानकीं त्यक्त्वा निर्गतस्तदावनुगः ॥ 43 ॥

लक्षणणोप्र च तां त्यक्त्वा निर्गतो मदवादुगाः।

वारितोप्र यमावत्थं मोहितः प्राकृतैपुर्गेः ॥ 44 ॥

Being under the delusion of Māyā, I could not make out the real nature of the golden deer; consequently leaving Jānaki in the thatched cottage, I went out perusing the deer. Though repeatedly warned by me not to leave the place, Lakṣmana was moved by the qualities of Prakṛti, forsook her and went out on my search.

विश्वरूपं ततः कृत्वा रावणः कयदाकृतः ।

जहार तरसा रक्षो जानकां शोककर्शिताम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Then the hypocrite Rāvaṇa, the king of the Rāksāsas, under the garb of a beggar; stole away by force the daughter of Janaka, who had become very lean on account of sorrows.

दुखातेन मय तत्र सर्दितं च चने वने ।

सुप्रीयेण च मित्रतं कृतं कार्यवर्गानया ॥ 46 ॥

I was very much distressed owing to the separation from my dear wife, and roamed about weeping sorely in forest and formed friendship with Sugriva, under the influence of the circumstances.

अन्यायेन हतो वाली शापाच्छेव निवारितः ।

सहायान्नानान्कृत्वा लंकायां चलितं पुनः ॥ 47 ॥

It was an act of gross injustice on my part to kill Vālī, the king of the monkeys. I freed him from his curse; afterwards, aided by the monkeys, I had to go to Lanka.

बद्धोर्भहं नापयाणीछ लक्ष्मणघ मानुनजः ।

विसंजी पत्तिते दृष्टवा वानरा विस्मयं नातः ॥ 48 ॥

When my younger Lakṣmana and myself were both enchained under the chain of the serpents,

Book IV Chapter XVIII

Någapåsa, and were senseless, the monkeys all were astonished.

गऊऊने तद्ध़प्रान्य मोचिती धातरी किल ।

चिन्ता मे महती जाता देई किं का कार्थस्थिति ॥ 49 ॥

Then Garuda came and freed us the two brothers, from those Någapåsås! I considered then what adverse inauspicious circumstances Fate sometimes ordians on our lot.

हतं राज्यं बने वासो मृत: तातः प्रिया हृता ।

युद्धं कटं द्वतार्वेममरे किं वा कार्विथिति ॥ 50 ॥

I lost my kingdom, lived in the forests, my father died, Jānakī was stolen and I had to suffer extreme troubles in very deadly battles; I could not know what worse fate still awaited for us?

प्रथम् तु महादुःखमार्जस्य वनाश्रयम् ।

राजपुत्राश्रावतर्येव धनहीनश्र निर्भितः ॥ 51 ॥

O Suras! What more calamity can you expect to befall any person than—that I was from the very first deprived of my kingdoms and wealth, and had to go to the forest with the princess Sitā dwelling in and taking shelter in a dense forest!

वार्टिकार्जि विरा मे न दत्ता वन्निर्भिये ।

पदातिरसहायोर्द्ध नधनीत्रश्र सिनीर । II 52 II

At the time of my going to the forest my father did not give a single penny; penniless and helpless I had to get out of Ayodhyā on foot.

वतूर्दैशि वर्षिणि नितानि च तदा मदा ।

क्षात्रं धर्म परित्यज्य व्याधयुत्त्या महावने । ५३ ॥

I was compelled to leave my Kṣattriya Dharma and take up the avocation of hunter and thus to spend fourteen years in forest.

दैवादुढे जयः प्राप्तो नित्ञोरसौ महासुरः ।

ज्ञानीता च पुनः सीता प्राप्ताप्रोथया माया तथा ॥ ५४ ॥

After that, under the benign influence of Fate, I was able to kill that Asura Rāvaṇa and got the victory in the battle and was able to bring back dear Sītā to Ayodhyā.

वर्षोरि कतिचित्रा सुखं संसारस्म्यवम् ।

प्राप्ति राज्यं च सम्पूर्णं कोसलाप्रधितिहत ॥ 55 ॥

There I succeeded in becoming the ruler of the

kingdom Kośala with its subjects and got the full kingdom and enjoyed for a few years the pleasures of the world.

पुरैव वर्तमानेन प्राप्ताराजेन वै तदा ।

लेकापवादपीतिन तत्का सीता वने मया ॥ 56 ॥

कान्ताविरहर्ने दुःखं पुनः प्राप्तं दुगासदम् ।

पातालं सा गता पश्धाद्वी तिभत्या धातकाना ॥ 57 ॥

The stealing away of Sītā took place at the first outset; next I got my kingdom; then the subjects began to circulated the bad name regarding Jānakī; and I being afraid of that, deported her into exile in the forest. At that time I had to suffer again extreme pain and agony due to the serparation from my wife. Then the daughter of the Goddess Earth penetrated into the Earth and got down to the Patāla.

एवं रायावततोर्षि दुःखं प्राप्तं निरितमम् ।

परतन्त्रणे मे नूनं स्वतन्तः को भवेत्तदा ॥ 58 ॥

O Devas! When I had to depend on Fate and to suffer so many troubles incessantly, where else can you dare to say that an independent man exists.

पश्राकालवशामुपाव: स्वर्गों में भातृभिनः सह ।

पततन्यस्य का वातां वतन्या विबुघेने वे ॥ ५९ ॥

Afterwards under the influence of Time, I had to go to Heaven with my brother. Let all this point to what it may, the intelligent learned people can say what an amount of mishaps takes place to one who is dependent!

पतन्तोउस्यहं नूनं पच्योगेने निशामय ।

तथा त्वमपि रूक्ष सर्वे चान्ये सुरोतमाः ॥ 60 ॥

डीत श्रीमदेश्वीभागते महापुराणे

चतुर्विकन्येउधारशोअयाः ।। 61 ॥

O One born from the Lotus! You hear my word; I am in every way dependent; why I? Rudra, You and all those Suras are fully dependent.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of

the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam

Śrimaddevithāgāvatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa

on the Devi Earth's going to

the Heavens.

