874 Stimaddevibhagavatam

' SS OS eT

CHAPTER XXXVIII
On the Vows and the Sacred Places of the Devi


हिमालय उवाच 
कति स्थानानि देवेशि द्रष्टव्यानि महीतले । 
मुख्यानि च पवित्राणि देवीप्रियतमानि च ॥ 1 ॥ 
व्रतान्यपि तथा यानि तुष्टिदान्युत्सवा अपि । 

ततत्सर्व वद्‌ मे मातः कृत्तकृत्यो यतो नरः ॥ 2 ॥

The Himalayas said: “O Devi! Describe the places on this earth that are prominent, sacred, and worth visiting and which Thou likest best. O Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows and utsavas that are pleasing to Thee, and by performing which, men become blessed and get themselves satisfied.

श्रीदेव्युवाच ।
सर्वं दृश्यं मम स्थानं सर्वे काला व्रतात्मकाः ।
उत्सवाः सर्वकालेषु यतोऽहं सर्वरूपिणी ॥ ३॥


Book Vil Chapter XXXVI

875

oO भक्तवात्सल्यात्किंचित्किचिदथोच्यते ।

शृणुष्वावहितो भूत्वा नगराज वचो मम ॥4॥

The Devi spoke: “O Himavan! All the places
that are on this earth are all Mine and all should be
visited. And every moment is fit for taking vows
and utsabs. For I am of the nature pervading every
moment, so whatever actions are performed at any
moment are all equal to taking My vows and
utsavas. O King of Mountains! Still T am now
telling something out of My affection to My
Bhaktas. Hear.

कोलापुरं महास्थानं यत्र लक्ष्मीः सदा स्थिता ।

मातुः पुरं द्वितीयं च रेणुकाधिष्ठितं परम्‌ ॥ 5 ॥

तुलजापुरं तृतीयं स्यात्सप्तशृङ्गं तथैव च ।

हिंगुलाया महास्थानं ज्वालामुख्यास्तथैव च ॥ 6 ॥

There is a great place of pilgrimage named
Kolhapura in the southern country. Here the Devi
Laksm1 always dwells. The second place is
Matripura in the Sahyadri mountain; here the
Devi Renuka dwells. The third placc is Tulajapur;
next is the place SaptaSrnga, the great places of
Hingula and Jvala Mukhi.

शाकंभर्याः परं स्थानं श्रामर्याः LATTA |

श्रीरक्तदन्तिकास्थानं दुर्गास्थानं तथैव च ॥ 7 ॥

विंध्याचलनिबासिन्याः स्थानं सर्वोत्तमोत्तमम्‌ |
अन्नपूर्णामहास्थानं काांचीपुरमनुत्तमम्‌ us ॥

Then the great places of Sakambhari,
Bhramari, Sriraktadantika and Durga. The best of
all places is that of Vindhyacala Vasini, the great
places of Annaptirna and the excellent Kaficipur
(Conjiverum).

भीमादेव्याः परं स्थानं विमलास्थानमेत्र च ।

श्रीचन्द्रलामह्दास्थानं कौशिकीस्थानमेव च ॥ 9 ॥

नीलांबायाः परं स्थानं नीलपर्वतमस्तके ।
जांबूनदेश्वरीस्थानं तथा श्रीनगरं शुभम्‌ ॥ 10 ॥

Next come the places of Bhima Devi, Vimala
Devi, Sri Candrala Devi of Karnat, and the place
of KauSsiki. Then are great place of Nilamba on
the top of the Nilaparvata, the place of
Jambiinade§vart, and the beautiful Srinagara.

गुह्यकाल्या महास्थानं नेपाले यत्प्रतिष्ठितम्‌ |

मीनाक्ष्याः परमं स्थानं यच्च प्रोक्तं चिदम्बरे ॥ 11 ॥

वेदारण्यं महास्थानं deat समधिष्ठितम्‌ ।

एकांबरं महास्थानं पराशक्त्या प्रतिष्ठितम्‌ ॥ 12 ॥

The great place of Sri Guhya Kali, well
established in Nepal, and that of Sri Minakst Devi
established in Cidamvaram. The great place
named Vedaranya where the Sundari Devi is
residing; then the place named Ekamvaram, and
the place Bhuvane$vara near Purusottama where I
always dwell as Para Sakti Bhuvaneévari.

मदालसा पर॑ स्थानं anteaters च ।

तथा नीलसरस्वत्याः स्थानं चीनेषु विश्रुतम्‌॥ 13 ॥

वैद्यनाथे ततु बगलास्थानं सर्वोत्तमं मतम्‌ ।

श्रीमच्छीीभुवनेश्वर्या मणिङ्घीपं मम स्मृतम्‌ ॥ 14 ॥

The famous place of Madalasd, known in the
south by the name Mallari, the place of Yogeévari
Varat, and the widely known place of Nila
Sarasvati in China. The excellent place of Bagala
in Baidyanath, the supreme place Manidvipa of
Srimati Bhuvanesvari where I always reside.

श्रीमत्त्रिपुरभैरव्याः कामाख्यायोनिमण्डलम्‌ |

भूमण्डले क्षेत्ररत्नं महामायाऽधिवासितम्‌ ॥ 15 ॥

नातः परतरं स्थानं क्वचिदस्ति धरातले ।

प्रतिमासं भवेद्देवी यत्र साक्षाद्रजस्वला ॥ 16॥

The Yonimandala Kamakhya, the place of
Srimati Tripura Bhairavi, the excellent of all the
places in this earth, where the Devi Maha Maya
always dwells. There is no other place better than
this on the earth. Here the Devi becomes every
month in Her course of menstruation and where
the virtuous men are seen.

तत्रत्या देकताः सर्वा पर्वतात्मकतां गताः |

पर्वतेषु वसंत्येच महत्यो देवता अपि ॥ 17 ॥

Here all the Devas remain in the form of
mountains and where on the mountains the
excellent Devas inhabit.

तत्रत्या प्रथिवी सर्वा देवीरूपा स्मृता बुधैः ।

नातः परतरं स्थानं कामाख्यायोनिमण्डलात्‌ ॥ 18 ॥

गायत्र्याश्च परं स्थानं श्रीमत्पुष्करमीरितम्‌।
876

Srimaddevibhagavatam

अमरेशे चण्डिका स्यात्प्रभासे पुष्करेक्षिणी ॥ 1 u

नैमिषे तु महास्थाने देवी सा लिङ्गधारिणी ।

पुरुहूता पुष्कराक्षे आषाढी च रतिस्तथ्चा ॥ 20 ॥

The sages say : That all the places there are of
the nature of the Devi; there is no better place than
this Kamakhya Yonimandala Puskara, the sacred
place, is the seat of Gayatri; the place of Candika
in AmareSa; and the excellent place of Puskareksini
in Prabhasa. The place of Lingadharini Devi in
Naimisaranya, and the place of Purubhita in
Puskaraksa; Rati dwells in Asadhi.

चण्डमुण्डीमहास्थाने दण्डिनी परमेश्वरी ।

भारभूतौ भवेद्भूतिर्नाकुले नकुलेश्वरी ॥ 21 ॥

चन्द्रिका तु हरिश्चन्द्रे श्रीगिरौ शांकरी स्मृता ।

जप्येश्वरे त्रिशूला स्यात्सूक्ष्मा चाम्रातकेश्वरे ॥ 22 ॥

शांकरी तु महाकाले शर्वाणी मध्यमाभिधे ।

केदाराख्ये महाक्षेत्रे देवी सा मार्गदायिनी ॥ 23 ॥

Dandini Paramesvari dwells in Candamundi-
Bhiti dwells in Bharabhuti, and Nakulesvari dwells
in Nakula. Candrika dwells in Harigcandra; Sankari
in Srigiri; Trisila in JapeSvara; and Suksma in
Amratakeévara. Sankari dwells in Ujjain, Sarvani
in the place Madhyama, and Marga Dayini dwells
in the holy Ksetra Kedara.

भैरवाख्ये भैरवी सा गयायां मंगला स्मृता ।

स्थाणुप्रिया कुरुक्षेत्रे स्वायंभुव्यपि नाकुले ॥ 24 ॥

कनखले भवेट्रुग्ा विश्वेशी विमलेश्वरे ।

अट्टहासे महानन्दा Hex तु महांतका ॥25॥

The celebrated Bhairavi dwells in the place
named Bhairava, Mangala in Gaya Ksettra;
Sthanupriya in Kuruksetra; and Svayambhuvi Devi
dwells in Nakula; Ugri dwells in Kankhala;
Visvesa dwells in Vimale$vara, Mahananda in
Attahasa; and Mahantaka in Mahendra.

भीमे भीमेश्वरी प्रोक्ता स्थाने वस्त्रायथे पुनः ।

भवानी शांकरी प्रोक्ता रुद्राणी त्वर्धकोटिके ॥ 26 ॥

अविमुक्ते विशालाक्षी महाभागा महालये ।

गोकर्णे भद्रकर्णी targa स्याद्भद्रकर्णके ॥ 27 ॥

उत्पलाक्षी सुवर्णाक्षे स्थाण्वीशा स्थाणुसंज्ञिके ।

कमलालबे तु कमला प्रचण्डा छगलंडके ॥ 28 ॥

Bhimegvari dwells in Bhima; the Bhavani Sankar
dwells in Vastrapadma; and Rudrani in Ardha Koti.
ViSaldksi dwells in Avimukta; Mahabhaga dwells
in Mahilaya; Bhadrakarni in Gokarna; and Bhadra
resides in Bhadrakarnaka; Utpalaksi dwells in
Suvarnaksa; Sthanvisa in Sthanu; Kamala in
Kamalalaya; Candia in Chagalandaka, situated in
the south near the sea coast.

कुरण्डले त्रिसंध्या स्यान्माकोटे मुकुटेश्वरी ।

मण्डलेशे शांडकी स्यात्काली कालंजरे पुनः ॥ 29 ॥

शंकुकर्णे ध्वनिः प्रोक्ता स्थूला स्यात्स्थूलकेश्चरे ।

ज्ञानिनां हृदयांभोजे हुल्लेखा परमेश्वरी ॥ 30 ॥

Trisandhya dwells in Kurundala; Mukutesvari
in Makota; Sandaki in Mandalega; Kali in
Kalafijara; Dhvani in Sankukarna; Sthila in
Sthttlake$vara; and Parame$vart Hrilekha dwells
in the heart lotuses of the Jiianins.

प्रोक्तानीमानि स्थानानि देव्याः fern च ।

तत्तत्क्षेत्रस्य माहात्म्यं श्रुत्वा पूर्व नगोत्तम ॥ 31 ॥

तदुक्तेन विधानेन asd? प्रपूजयेत्‌ |

The places mentioned above are all dearest to
the Devi First the merits of these places are to be
heard; next the Devi is to be worshipped by the
rites and ceremonies according to these rules.

अथवा सर्वक्षेत्राणि काश्यां सन्ति नगोत्तम ॥ 32 ॥

wa चैव वसेन्नित्यं देवीभाक्तिपरायणः ।

त्तानि स्थानानि संपश्यञ्जपन्देवीं निरन्तरम्‌ ॥ 33 ॥

ध्याबंस्तच्चरणांभोजं मुक्तो भवति बन्धनात्‌ ।

इमानि देवीनामानि प्रातरुत्थास यः पठेत्‌ ॥ 34 ॥

Or, O Mountain! All the holy places of
pilgrimages cxist in Kasi. The Devi always dwells
there. Persons. devoted to the Devi, see these places
and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus-
feet of the Devi, they will cartainly be freed from
the bounds of Sarhsara; there is no doubt in this. If
anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the
names of these places, all his sins would instantly
be burnt away.

भस्मीभवन्ति पापानि तत्क्षणान्नग सत्वरम्‌ ।

श्राद्धकाले पठेदेतान्यमलानि ह्विजाग्रतः ॥ 35 ॥
Book VU Chapter XXX VIL

877

And if one reads, in the time म Sraddha, before
the Brahmins, these holy names of the Devi, his
Pitrs will be purified of their sins in the Mahakasa
by the Maha Prana and will get their highest goal.

मुक्तास्तत्पितरः सर्वे प्रयान्ति परमां गतिम्‌ ।

अधुना कथयिष्यामि ब्रत्तानि सब सुब्रत ॥ 36 ॥

नारीभिश्च नरैश्चैव कर्तव्यानि प्रयत्नतः ।

ब्रततमनन्ततृतीयाख्यं रसकल्याणिनीब्रतम्‌ ॥ 37 ॥
आर्द्रनन्दकरं नाम्ना तृतीयाया व्रतं च यत्‌ ।

Yaad चैव तथा कृष्णचतुर्दशी ॥ 38 ॥

O One of good vows! I will now describe to
you the vows that are to be carefully observed by
men and women; hear. Ananta Trtiyakhya Vrata
(vow), Rasakalyani Vrata, and Ardranandakara
Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the
Trtiya (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow,
the Krsna Caturdasi vows, the Tuesday vow, and
the evening twilight vow.

भौमवारब्रतं da प्रदोषन्रतमेव च ।

यत्र देवो महादेवो देवीं Pears विष्टरे ॥ 39 ॥

नृत्यं करोति पुरतः सार्ध देवैर्निशामुखे ।

तत्रोपोष्य रजन्यादौ प्रदोषे पूजयेच्छिवाम्‌ ॥ 40 ॥

In this twilight vow, Maha Deva places the Devi
in the evening on an Asana, and He, along with
the other Devas, began to dance before Her, Fasting
is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening
one must worship the Devi, the Giver of all
auspicious things. Especially in every forthight, if
the Devi be worshipped, She gets extremely
pleased.

प्रतिपक्षं विशेषेण तदेवीप्रीतिकारकम्‌ ।

सोमवारव्रतं चैव ममातिप्रियकृन्नग ॥41॥

O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very
agreeable to Me, the worship of the Devi should
be done and then in the night one must take one’s
food.

तत्रापि देवीं सम्पूज्य रात्रौ भोजनमाचरेत्‌ ।

नवरात्रष्ठयं चैव ब्रतं प्रीतिकरं मम ॥42॥

एवमन्यान्यपि विभो नित्यमैमित्तिकानि च।

Baht कुरुते यो वै मत्प्रीत्यर्थं विमत्सरः ॥ 43 ॥

The two nine nights vow called Navaratra are
to be observed, one in the autumn and the other in
the spring season. These are very dear to Me. He
is certainly My devotee and very dear who for My
satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya
Naimittik vows, free from any pride and jealousy.
He certainly gets the Sajujya Mukti with Me.

प्रप्नोति मम सायुज्यं स मे भक्तः स मे प्रियः ।

उत्सवानपि कुर्वीत दोलोत्सवमुखान्विभो ॥ 44 ॥

शयनोत्सवं तथा कुर्यात्तदा जागरणोत्सवम्‌ |

रथोत्सबं च मे कुर्यादमनोत्सवमेव च ॥45॥

पवित्रोत्सवमेवापि श्रावणे प्रीतिकारकम्‌ |

मम भक्तः सदा कुर्यादेवमन्यान्महोत्सबान्‌ ॥ 46 ॥

O Nagaraja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the
month of Caitra on the third day of the white
fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should be
observed by all. My devotees perform the
Sayanotsava in the Paurnamasi in the month of
Asadha; the Jagaranotsava in the Paurnamasi in
the month of Kartika, the Ratha Yatra in the 3rd of
the white fortnight in Asadha; the Damanotsava in
Caitra. And my dear festivals in the month of
Sravana and various other festivals.

Tara तथा चैव सुवासिनीः ।

कुमारीर्वदुकांश्चापि मद्बुद्ध्या तद्नतांतरः ॥ 47 ॥

वित्तशाठ्येन रहितो यजेदेतान्सुमादिभिः ।

य एवं कुरुते भक्त्या प्रतिवर्षमतंद्रितः ॥ 48 ॥

स धन्यः कृतकृत्योऽसौ मत्प्रीतेः पात्रमञ्जसा |

सर्वमुक्तं समासेन मम प्रीतिदायकम्‌ |

नाशिष्याय प्रदातव्यं नाभक्ताय कदाचन ॥ 49 ॥

इति श्रीगद्देवीभागवते महाएुराणे
देवीगीतायामटत्रिंशोऽक्यायः ।। 49 ।।

In all these festivals one should feast well with
gladness all My devotees, and the Kumaris
(virgins), well clothed and dressed, and the boys,
thinking them all to be of My very nature. No
miserliness is to be entertained and I should be
worshipped with flowers, etc. He is blessed and
attains his goal and is dear to Me who carefully
and devotedly observes every year all these
878 Srimaddevibhagavatam

RR i
festivals. O Nagendra! Thus I have described to| Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh
you in brief all the vows that are pleasing to Me, | Book on the vows and the sacred places of the Devi
These instructions are not to be given who is not a| 4” the Maha Purapam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of

disciple nor to one who is not My devotee.” 16,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa.

