[Ch 38 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Himalayas said: “O Devi! Describe the places on this earth that are prominent, sacred, and worth visiting and which Thou likest best. O Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows and utsavas that are pleasing to Thee, and by performing which, men become blessed and get themselves satisfied.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Himālayās said :-- "O Devī! Describe the places on this earth that are prominent, sacred, and worth visiting and which Thou likest best. O Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows and utsabs that are pleasing to Thee, and by performing which, men become blessed and get themselves satisfied.

[Ch 38 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi spoke: “O Himavan! All the places that are on this earth are all Mine and all should be visited. And every moment is fit for taking vows and utsabs. For I am of the nature pervading every moment, so whatever actions are performed at any moment are all equal to taking My vows and utsavas. O King of Mountains! Still T am now telling something out of My affection to My Bhaktas. Hear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī spoke :-- "O Himavan! All the places that are on this earth are all Mine and all should be visited. And every moment is fit for taking vows and utsabs. For I am of the nature pervading every moment; so whatever actions are performed at any moment are all equal to taking My vows and utsabs. O King of Mountains! Still I am now telling something out of My affection to My Bhaktaṣ. Hear.

[Ch 38 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is a great place of pilgrimage named Kolhapura in the southern country. Here the Devi Laksm1 always dwells. The second place is Matripura in the Sahyadri mountain; here the Devi Renuka dwells. The third placc is Tulajapur; next is the place SaptaSrnga, the great places of Hingula and Jvala Mukhi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is a great place of pilgrimage named Kolhāpura in the southern country. Here the Devī Lakṣmi always dwells. The second place is Mātripura in the Sahyādrī mountain; here the Devī Reṇukā dwells. The third place is Tulajāpur; next is the place Saptaśriṅga, the great places of Hingulā and Jvālā Mukhī.

[Ch 38 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the great places of Sakambhari, Bhramari, Sriraktadantika and Durga. The best of all places is that of Vindhyacala Vasini, the great places of Annaptirna and the excellent Kaficipur (Conjiverum).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the great places of Sākambharī, Bhrāmāri, Śrīraktadantikā and Dūrgā. The best of all places is that of Vindhyācala Vāsinī, the great places of Annapurnā and the excellent Kāñcipur (Conjiverum).

[Ch 38 Verse 8-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next come the places of Bhima Devi, Vimala Devi, Sri Candrala Devi of Karnat, and the place of KauSsiki. Then are great place of Nilamba on the top of the Nilaparvata, the place of Jambiinade§vart, and the beautiful Srinagara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next come the places of Bhīmā Devī, Vimalā Devī, Śrī Caṇdralā Devī of Karṇāṭ, and the place of Kauśikī. Then the great place of Nīlāmbā on the top of the Nīlāparvata, the

[Ch 38 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great place of Sri Guhya Kali, well established in Nepal, and that of Sri Minakst Devi established in Cidamvaram. The great place named Vedaranya where the Sundari Devi is residing; then the place named Ekamvaram, and the place Bhuvane$vara near Purusottama where I always dwell as Para Sakti Bhuvaneévari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great place of Śrī Guhya Kālī, well established in Nepal, and that of Śrī Mīnākṣī Devī established in Cīdamvaram. The great place named Vedāraṇya where the Sundarī Devī is residing; then the place named Ekāmvaram, and the place Bhuvaneśvara near Puruṣottama where I always dwell as Parā Śakti Bhuvaṇeśvarī.

[Ch 38 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The famous place of Madalasd, known in the south by the name Mallari, the place of Yogeévari Varat, and the widely known place of Nila Sarasvati in China. The excellent place of Bagala in Baidyanath, the supreme place Manidvipa of Srimati Bhuvanesvari where I always reside.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The famous place of Mahālasā, known in the south by the name Mallāri; the place of Yogeśvarī Varāṭ, and the widely known place of Nīla Śarasvatī in China. The excellent place of Bagalā in Baidyanāth, the supreme place Maṇidvīpa of Śrīmatī Bhuvaneśvarī where I always reside.

[Ch 38 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Yonimandala Kamakhya, the place of Srimati Tripura Bhairavi, the excellent of all the places in this earth, where the Devi Maha Maya always dwells. There is no other place better than this on the earth. Here the Devi becomes every month in Her course of menstruation and where the virtuous men are seen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Yonimaṇḍala Kāmākhyā, the place of Śrimatī Tripurā Bhariavī, the excellent of all the places in this earth, where the Devī Mahā Māyā always dwells. There is no other place better than this on the earth. Here the Devī becomes every month in Her course of menstruation and where the virtuous men are seen.

[Ch 38 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here all the Devas remain in the form of mountains and where on the mountains the excellent Devas inhabit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here all the Devas remain in the form of mountains and where on the mountains the excellent Devas inhabit.

[Ch 38 Verse 18-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sages say : That all the places there are of the nature of the Devi; there is no better place than this Kamakhya Yonimandala Puskara, the sacred place, is the seat of Gayatri; the place of Candika in AmareSa; and the excellent place of Puskareksini in Prabhasa. The place of Lingadharini Devi in Naimisaranya, and the place of Purubhita in Puskaraksa; Rati dwells in Asadhi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sages say: That all the places there are of the nature of the Devī; there is no better place than this Kāmākhyā Yonimaṇḍala. Puṣkara, the sacred place, is the seat of Gāyatrī; the place of Caṇḍikā in Amareśa: and the excellent place of Puṣkarekṣiṇī in Frabhāsa. The place of Liṅga-dhāriṇī Devī in Naimiṣāraṇya, and the place of Purubutā in Puṣkarākṣa; Rati dwells in Āsāḍhī.

[Ch 38 Verse 21-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dandini Paramesvari dwells in Candamundi- Bhiti dwells in Bharabhuti, and Nakulesvari dwells in Nakula. Candrika dwells in Harigcandra; Sankari in Srigiri; Trisila in JapeSvara; and Suksma in Amratakeévara. Sankari dwells in Ujjain, Sarvani in the place Madhyama, and Marga Dayini dwells in the holy Ksetra Kedara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Daṇḍinī Parameśvari dwells in Caṇḍamunḍī. Bhūti dwells in Bhārabhūti; and Nakule Śvarī dwells in Nākula. Candrikā dwells in Hariścandra; Śāṅkari in Śrīgiri; Triśūlā in Japeśvara; and Sukṣmā in Āmrāta Keśvara. Śāṅkarī dwells in Ujjain, Śarvāṇī in the place Madhyamā, and Mārga Dāyini dwells in the holy Kṣetra Kedāra.

[Ch 38 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The celebrated Bhairavi dwells in the place named Bhairava, Mangala in Gaya Ksettra; Sthanupriya in Kuruksetra; and Svayambhuvi Devi dwells in Nakula; Ugri dwells in Kankhala; Visvesa dwells in Vimale$vara, Mahananda in Attahasa; and Mahantaka in Mahendra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The celebrated Bhairavī dwells in the place named Bhairava; Mangalā in Gayā Kṣettra; Sthānupriyā in Kurukṣetra; and Svāyambhuvī Devī dwells in Nākula; Ugrā dwells in Kankhal; Viśvesā dwells in Vimaleśvara, Mahānandā in Attahāsa and Mahāntakā in Mahendra.

[Ch 38 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhimegvari dwells in Bhima; the Bhavani Sankar dwells in Vastrapadma; and Rudrani in Ardha Koti. ViSaldksi dwells in Avimukta; Mahabhaga dwells in Mahilaya; Bhadrakarni in Gokarna; and Bhadra resides in Bhadrakarnaka; Utpalaksi dwells in Suvarnaksa; Sthanvisa in Sthanu; Kamala in Kamalalaya; Candia in Chagalandaka, situated in the south near the sea coast.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhimeśvarī dwells in Bhīma; the Bhavānī Śaṅkarī dwells in Vastrāpadma; and Rudrāṇī in Ardha Koṭī. Viśalākṣī dwells in Avimukta; Mahābhāgā dwells in Mahālaya; Bhadrakarṇī in Gokarṇa; and Bhadrā resides in Bhadrakarṇak; Utpalākṣī dwells in Suvarnākṣa; Sthāṇvīśā in Sthāṇu; Kamalā in Kamalālayā; Caṇḍā in Cagalaṇḍaka, situated in the south near the sea coast.

[Ch 38 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Trisandhya dwells in Kurundala; Mukutesvari in Makota; Sandaki in Mandalega; Kali in Kalafijara; Dhvani in Sankukarna; Sthila in Sthttlake$vara; and Parame$vart Hrilekha dwells in the heart lotuses of the Jiianins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Trisandhyā dwells in Kuruṇḍala; Mukuṭeśvarī in Mākoṭa; Śānḍakī in Mandaleśa; Kālī in Kālañjara; Dhvani in Śaṅkukarṇa; Sthūlā in Sthūlakeśvara; and Parameśvarī Hrillekhā dwells in the heart lotuses of the Jñanins.

[Ch 38 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The places mentioned above are all dearest to the Devi First the merits of these places are to be heard; next the Devi is to be worshipped by the rites and ceremonies according to these rules.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The places mentioned above are all dearest to the Devī. First the merits of these places are to be heard; next the Devī is to be worshipped by the rites and ceremonies according to these rules.

[Ch 38 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or, O Mountain! All the holy places of pilgrimages cxist in Kasi. The Devi always dwells there. Persons. devoted to the Devi, see these places and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus- feet of the Devi, they will cartainly be freed from the bounds of Sarhsara; there is no doubt in this. If anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the names of these places, all his sins would instantly be burnt away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or, O Mountain! All the holy places of pilgrimages exist in Kāśī. The Devī always dwells there. Persons, devoted to the Devī, see these places and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus-feet of the Devī, they will certainly be freed from the bonds of Samsāra; there is no doubt in this. If anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the names of these places, all his sins would instantly be burnt away.

[Ch 38 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Book VU Chapter XXX VIL And if one reads, in the time म Sraddha, before the Brahmins, these holy names of the Devi, his Pitrs will be purified of their sins in the Mahakasa by the Maha Prana and will get their highest goal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And if one reads, in the time of Śrāddha, before the Brahmiṇs, these holy names of the Devī, his Pitris will be purified of their sins in the Mahākāśa by the Mahā Prāṇa and will get their highest goal.

[Ch 38 Verse 36-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of good vows! I will now describe to you the vows that are to be carefully observed by men and women; hear. Ananta Trtiyakhya Vrata (vow), Rasakalyani Vrata, and Ardranandakara Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the Trtiya (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow, the Krsna Caturdasi vows, the Tuesday vow, and the evening twilight vow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of good vows! I will now describe to you the vows that are to be carefully observed by men and women; hear. Ananta Tritīyākhya Vrata (vow), Rasakalyānī Vrata, and Ārdrānandakara Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the Tritīyā (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow, the Kṛṣṇa Caturdaśi vows, the Tuesday vow, and the evening twilight vow.

[Ch 38 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In this twilight vow, Maha Deva places the Devi in the evening on an Asana, and He, along with the other Devas, began to dance before Her, Fasting is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening one must worship the Devi, the Giver of all auspicious things. Especially in every forthight, if the Devi be worshipped, She gets extremely pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In this twilight vow, Mahā Deva placed the Devī in the evening on an Āsana; and He, along with the other Devas, began to dance before Her. Fasting is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening one must worship the Devī, the Giver of all auspicious things. Especially in every fortnight, if the Devī be worshipped, She gets extremely pleased.

[Ch 38 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very agreeable to Me, the worship of the Devi should be done and then in the night one must take one’s food.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very agreeable to Me; the worship of the Devī should be done and then in the night one must take one’s food.

[Ch 38 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two nine nights vow called Navaratra are to be observed, one in the autumn and the other in the spring season. These are very dear to Me. He is certainly My devotee and very dear who for My satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya Naimittik vows, free from any pride and jealousy. He certainly gets the Sajujya Mukti with Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two nine nights vow called Navarātra are to be observed, one in the autumn and the other in the spring season. These are very dear to Me. He is certainly My devotee and very dear who for My satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya Naimittik vows, free from any pride and jealousy. He certainly gets the Sājujya Mukti with Me.

[Ch 38 Verse 44-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nagaraja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the month of Caitra on the third day of the white fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should be observed by all. My devotees perform the Sayanotsava in the Paurnamasi in the month of Asadha; the Jagaranotsava in the Paurnamasi in the month of Kartika, the Ratha Yatra in the 3rd of the white fortnight in Asadha; the Damanotsava in Caitra. And my dear festivals in the month of Sravana and various other festivals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nagarāja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the month of Cait on tha third day of the white fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should be observed by all. My devotees perform the Śayanotsava in the Paurṇāmāsī in the month of Āsāḍha; the Jāgaraṇotsava in the Paurṇamāsī in the month of Kārtik, the Ratha Jātrā in the 3rd of the white fortnight in Āsāḍha; the Damanotsava in Caitra. And my dear festivals in the month of Śrāvana and various other festivals.

[Ch 38 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In all these festivals one should feast well with gladness all My devotees, and the Kumaris (virgins), well clothed and dressed, and the boys, thinking them all to be of My very nature. No miserliness is to be entertained and I should be worshipped with flowers, etc. He is blessed and attains his goal and is dear to Me who carefully and devotedly observes every year all these 878 Srimaddevibhagavatam RR ॥ festivals. O Nagendra! Thus I have described to Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh you in brief all the vows that are pleasing to Me,  Book on the vows and the sacred places of the Devi These instructions are not to be given who is not a 4” the Maha Purapam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of disciple nor to one who is not My devotee.” 16,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In all these festivals one should feast well with gladness all My devotees, and the Kumāris (virgins), well clothed and dressed, and the boys, thinking them all to be of My very nature. No miserliness is to be entertained and I should be worshipped with flowers, etc. He is blessed and attains his goal and is dear to Me who carefully and devotedly observes every year all these festivals. O Nagendra! Thus I have described to you in brief all the vows that are pleasing to Me. These instructions are not to be given who is not a disciple nor to one
