CHAPTER VIII

On Śaci's Praising the Devi

व्यास उवाच

नहुषस्त्वध तां शुत्वा गुरोस्तु शरणां गताम् ।

चुळोधे भयबाणात्तैनत्मागिरिसमाशु वै ॥ १ ॥

देवानाहांगीरिस्तुरुर्नतव्योर्धं यमा बिल।

स इन्द्राणीं गृहे गृहों स्थतिति मया श्रुतम् ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken refuge under Brhaspati, the King Nahuṣa became very angry with Brhaspati and spoke to the Devas: “O Devas! I hear that the stupid son of Angirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept her in his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.”

इति तं कुपितं दूद्धवा देवा: सर्विपुरोगमाः ।

अबुबवुघर्य घोरं सामपूर्वे बचस्ताद ॥ 3 ॥

क्रोधें संहर राजेन्द्र त्वज पापामर्ति प्रभो ।

Seeing the terrible Nahuṣa thus angry, the Devas and Rṣis consoled him and said: O King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive of yours.

निर्विति धर्मशास्त्रिय पददात्राथिमर्शनम् ॥ 4 ॥

शक्रफल्नी सदा साध्यौ जीक्याने पतौ पुत्रः ।

See, the Rşis, in all the Dharma Śāstras, have declared the holding of illicit connection with others' wives as a very heinous crime and have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter of Pulomā is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very good-natured.

कवमर्थे पर्ति कुवांत्सुभग्राजित्यितता ॥ 5 ॥

त्रितौकीशस्वमधुना शास्ता धार्मय वै किये ।

त्वापुर्णोर्धभातिहेत्नदा नर्येवृत्रा ध्यून ॥ 6 ॥

How can she, when her husband is alive, take another husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and hence the Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you acts irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation.

सर्वथा प्रभुणा कार्य शिष्टाचारस्य रक्षणम् ।

वारमुख्यश्र शतशो वस्तैउत्र शचीसमाः ॥ 7 ॥

One who is a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides there are many other celestial woman in this Heaven as beautiful as Śacī; you can satisfy your thirst with them.

रतिस्तु कारणं प्रोक्ते शूक्रात्रस्य महात्माथि: ।

रसहानिर्बलात्कारे कृते सति तु जायते ॥ 8 ॥

Mutual love is recognised by the wise as the true originator of amorous dealings; ravishing a women by force destroys all amorous sentiments.

उभयोः सद्गं प्रेप यदि पार्थवसन्ति ।

तदा वे सुखसम्यतिनभयोगेकपजायते ॥ 9 ॥

तत्सामूद्रविमं भूंच पदरातरामप्रर्शने ।

सढ़ावं कुरु देवेत्र पदं प्रापोजीयन्तुनामम् ॥ 10 ॥

O King! And if the mutual love be similar and equal in all respects, then comes the true happiness; you have now got the post of Indra; therefore quit this idea of holding illicit connection with other's wives and indulge in other good thoughts.

ऋद्धिश्यन्तु यापेन पुण्येनातिविधर्धानम् ।

तस्मायपं परित्यज्य समन्ति कुक पार्थिव ॥  १ १ ॥

Demerits destroy prosperity and merits increase it. Therefore, O King! Leave all these bad thoughts and make your heart take a good turn and be happy.

नरुप उवाच

गौतमस्य यदा भृक्ता द्वारा: शक्रिण देवतः ।

वाचसपतेतु सोमेन कव यूयं संशित्यातस्तदा ॥ 12 ॥

Nahuṣa said: “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole away the wife of Bhraspati?

परोधेदेने कुगलाः प्रभवन्ति नराः किल ।

कर्ता चैवोपेटध्च च दुर्वंप: पुरुषो भवेत् ॥ 13 ॥

मामागच्छुत स देवी हितं स्याद्धुत हि वः ।

एतस्य: परमं देवाः सुखमेवं भविष्यति ॥ 14 ॥

It is easy to give advice to others but to act according to that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified Devi come to me; you will derive much benefit from it and the Devi, too,

Book VI Chapter VIII

will get Her highest happiness; there is no doubt in this.

अन्यथा न हि तुध्येड़ं सत्यामेतदुखवीमि वः ।

विन्याड़ा बताड़ापि तमाशु प्रापयित्विह ॥ 15 ॥

I tell you truly that in no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrānī here quickly, whether by good words or by force.

इति तस्य वचः श्रुत्वा देवाढ्य मुनवस्तथा ।

तमूचुशातिसंत्रता नहुषं मदन्तातून ॥ 16 ॥

इत्राणीभानीयधामा: सामपूर्वे त्वातिकम् ।

इन्युक्ना ते त्वा जमयुढ़स्यातिनिकेतानम् ॥ 17 ॥

The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahuṣa, smitten by the Cupid's arrows, got terrified and said: "We will bring Indrānī to you by gentle words." Saying thus, they went to the house of Brhaspati.

व्यास उवाच

ते गत्वांगिरसः पूरं प्रोषुः प्रांजलयः सुराः ।

जानीमः शरणं प्राप्तामिंग्रणी तव वेप्यनि ॥ 18 ॥

सा देवा नटुषामाषा वासवोउरी कृतोतयतः ।

वृणीत्विं वरगोहा परिलेल वरवर्गिनी ॥ 19 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas, going to the house of Brhaṣpati, spoke thus with folded hands: O Guru! We know that Indrānī has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her over today to the king Nahuṣa, for we all united have made over the post of Indra to Nahuṣa. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and worship him.

ब्रह्मयितः सुरानाह तत्कृत्वा दाक्षा वचः ।

नाहं त्यध्ये तु पौलोमीं सतीं च सशणगात्मा ॥ 20 ॥

Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brhaspati said to them: "O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her husband, has now taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with her."

देवा कचुः

उयायोद्यः प्रकर्तेथो येन सोउष प्रसीदिति ।

अन्यथा कोपसंयुक्तो तुरात्याधे पविष्यति ॥ 21 ॥

The Devas said: "O Guru! Kindly advise thence—if you do not part with Śacī Devī—how the king

Nahuṣa is to be pleased; if he becomes angry, it will then by very difficult to please him."

गुरुकाव

तत्र गत्वा शर्षी घृष्यं प्रतोष्य बसया घृष्यम् ।

कोरुतु समयं बाला पति जाला मृतं भजे ॥ 22 ॥

Brhapsati said: "O Devas! Let Śacī now go to Nahuṣa, and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when her husband's death will be known to her, she will then accept Nahuṣa as her husband.

इन्हे जीवित मे कान्ते कवम्ययं कोरोयहम् ।

अन्वेषणाधि नात्वयं मया तस्य महात्मनः ॥ 23 ॥

How could she accept another husband when her husband was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of her high-souled husband.

इति सा समयं कृत्वा वंचल्यिता च भूपतिम् ।

भतुर्णनये यन्ते कगोतु मम वाक्यतः ॥ 24 ॥

Let Sāci thus make condition with him and, thus deceiving him, let her try her best to bring back her husband.

इति सच्छित्य ते सर्वे बृत्यासिपुर्णेगामः ।

नहुर्ष सहित जगमुर्दिस्त्या दिवौकसः ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Then, after coming to this conclusion, Bhraspati and other Devas went with Indrānī to the king Nahuṣa.

तानागातानस्मीक्ष्याह तदा कृमिवमासवः ।

जहर्ष च मुदायुक्तस्तां बीक्ष्य मुदितोजबीत् ॥ 26 ॥

Seeing them come, especially looking at Indrānī, the artificial king Nahuṣa became very glad and said to Indrānī:

अशास्त्र यासवः कान्ते भत्र भां चाक्तोचने ।

पतित्वे सर्वतीकस्य पूच्योड़ं विहितः सुरैः ॥ 27 ॥

'O Beloved Today I am become the real Indra. O beautiful eyed One! Worship me as your husband; see the Devas now have made me to be worshipped by all the gods.

इत्युक्ता सा नृपं ग्रह येयमाना त्राययुता ।

वरामिछ्यायरं राजस्कलतः प्राण सुरेश्व ॥ 28 ॥

किंचित्यालं प्रतीक्ष्वस्य यावत्बूर्व विविणयम् ।

इंत्रोरस्तीन न वार्तस्तीन सन्नेहो मे हुदि स्थितः ॥ 29 ॥

When Nahuṣa spoke thus, the Devi Śaci became filled with great shame; she began to tremble and said to the king: "O Lord of the Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you. Better wait till I ascertain whether Indra is dead or alive, there is this doubt in my heart whether he lives or whether he is dead.

ततस्त्वा समुप्यास्ये कृत्वा निश्यामतानि ।

तालक्यमस्य राजेन्द्र सत्यमेतदूखबीति ते ।। ३० ॥

O King of kings! Let me, first of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait till then. I tell this truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will worship you.

न हि विज्ञाने शक्रो नह कि का वच वा गतः ।

एवमुक्तः स इन्द्रायणा ननुषः प्रीतिनाभभूत् ॥ ३ १ ॥

I do not know else." When Śacī Devi spoke thus, Nahusa became very glad and saying "let it be so" dismissed her.

व्यम्बनसल तां देवीं तथेयुक्णवा मुदावितः।

सा विमुहा नृपेशागु नाला प्राह सुरानस्ती ॥ ३ २ ॥

Thus having received permission from the King to depart, Śaci hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their best to bring Indra back as soon as possible.

इन्स्यायामये चलं कुस्ताङ्म कृतोघाम: ।

शुना तद्रचनं देव इन्द्राण्या रसवछ्छिं ॥ ३ ३  ॥

O King! Hearing these sweet and holy words of Indrānī, the Devas intently consulted with each other how they could get back Indra.

मन्यामासुरोकापा: शकाश्वं नृपसत्तम ।

ते नाला वैष्णवां धाय तुड्वुः परमेश्वर ॥ 34 ॥

They then went to Vaikuntha and began to praise with hymns the original Deva, the God Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, king to those that seek His refuge.

आदिदेवें जनान्वां शरणागतवत्सलम् ।

क्रशुक्षीनं समुद्धिना वाक्यं वाक्यविशपातः ॥ 35 ॥

The Devas, skilled in speaking, spoke to Viṣṇu with a very troubled heart: "O Lord! Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much troubled with his sin Brahmatahyā.

देवदेवः सुर्पतिबंहाहल्याप्रवीडितः ।

अद्रुयः सर्वभृताना क्वापि तिष्ठति वास्मः ॥ 36 ॥

Where is he staying now, invisible to all the beings? O Lord! He is overcome with the sin Brahmatahyā by killing Vṛtra, the best of the Brāhmins.

त्वप्रिया नितते विश्र ब्रह्माव्यातुः प्रभो ।

त्व गतिरातस्य भगवत्रमाकं च तथेव हि ॥ 37 ॥

We ask your skilful and intelligent advise. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him as well as of us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly shew us the way how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult crisis."

राहि नः पर्यावपात्नोर्हं तस्य विनिदित्रा ।

देवानां वचनं शूला कातरं विद्युग्बबीत् ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing the pitiful words of the Devas, Viṣṇu said: Let Indra perform the ASvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the purification of his sins.

यज्ञातमध्येने शक्रापयिनुचने ।

पुष्पेन हयमेघेन पाचितः पाकशासनः ॥ 39 ॥

By this Yajña, that can destroy all sins, Indra will be purified and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in this.

पुनेथिति देवानाभिम्रत्वमुकौभयः ।

हयमेघेन सन्तुहा देवी श्रीजाद्विषका ॥ 40 ॥

The more so because the Devi, the Universal Mother, will be pleased with his Horse sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, Brahmatahyā and others.

ब्रह्मात्यादियापनि नागशियल्यसंशयम् ।

यस्या: स्मरणागयोग पायाजलां तिनर्यति ॥ 41 ॥

किं पुनर्विजीमेनेन तर्जीत्यर्थ कृतेन च ।

Lo! Merely remembering Her destroys heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse sacrifice, She is pleased, what wonder is there that sins of a more grave nature would be destroyed!

इन्द्राणी कृकृतावित्य भगवताय: प्रयुजनम् ॥ 42 ॥

आराधनं शिवायास्तु सुखकारी भविष्यति ।

नहुणेपि जगनानुगर्भाया मोहितः किल ॥ 43 ॥

विनार्णं स्वकृतेनागु यामिष्यलेनासा सुरा: ।

पाचितश्राधयेनेन तुर्याडिवे भैबवम् ॥ 44 ॥

Book VI Chapter VIII

And let Indrānī worship Bhagavatī daily; happiness will undoubtedly be gained by worshipping that most Auspicious One! By this the King Nahusa will be particularly deluded by the World Mother and will then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by himself. And Indra, purified by Aśvamedha, will soon regain his position and all his wealth.

प्रायस्यचिरकालेन स्वामसन्ननुम् ।

ते तु श्रुत्वा शृणां वाणी विश्वागरिततेजसः ॥ 4 5 ॥

जम्पुस्ते इंशमिनीयं यशतरे पाकशासनः ।

तमाश्राव सुरा: शक्र बृह्मस्पितुगेनाम: ॥ 46 ॥

कारयामासुराखिलं हयमेधं महाकानून ।

विभयज बहाहत्यां तु वृक्षेषु च नरीषु च ॥ 47 ॥

पर्वतेषु पृथिध्यां च क्लीषु चेवाधिपदिषु: ।

O King! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial words of Viṣṇu of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the spot, where resided Indra. Brhaspati and the other Devas consoled the distressed Indra and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse sacrifice the greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin Brahmahattyā amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth.

तां विमुस्य च भृतेषु विषयाः पाकशासनः ॥ 4 8 ॥

विज्ञः सम्भुद्रयः कालाकक्षी चित्तो जले ।

अदृष्यः सर्वभृतानां घप्नानाले व्यतिष्ठत ॥ 49 ॥

देवालुं निरिता: स्थाने कृत्वा कार्य निद्दुन्तम् ।

Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra became again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and uneasiness, abided by the time and remained there invisible in the tubular stem of the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas

started from there and reached their own abodes.

पौलोमी तु गुरु प्राह दुःस्तिता विरहाकुला ॥ 50 ॥

कृतयज्ञोरपि मे भर्ता किमयुर्शय: पुरन्दः ।

कयं उद्धरे प्रियं स्वामित्समुपारं वद्रव से ॥ ५ १ ॥

The daughter of Puloma, suffering from her breeavements of Indra, spoke then to Brhaspati with great sorrow: "O Lord! Why is my husband still invisible to me, when he has performed the

Aśvamedha sacrifice? Kindly shew me the way how I do can get a sight of him."

ब्रह्मतिहाव

त्वमाराधय पौलोमि देहीं भगवर्ती शिवाण ।

द्रांशियक्षिति ते नार्यं देही विनतकल्पम् ॥ 52 ॥

Bhraspati said: “O Devi! Worship the most Auspicious Bhagavati; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will see him.”

आराधिता जान्याद्री नयुर्धे वारयेधिति ।

मोहायिता नृपं स्थानतालयिषति चाधिका ॥ 53 ॥

The Devi Ambikā, the Upholdress of the Universe, will desist the King Nahuṣa from doing the wrongful act and it is She that will delude him by Her Māyā and get his downfall from the Heavens.

इतुकृता सा तदा तेन पुणेतानया नृप ।

जग्राह मन्त्र विधिवद्धुरोदैव्या: ससाधनम् ॥ 54 ॥

विद्यां प्राय पुरोदैंकी देईी शीभुवनेश्रीम् ।

सव्यागाध्यायमास बलिषुणार्चैंः शुर्षे: ॥ 55 ॥

O King! When Brhaspati spoke thus, Śacī Devi got initiated by him in the Devi Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. Thus getting the Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the Devi Bhuvanesvari duly with flowers, sacrificial victims and other necessary articles for worship.

त्यक्तान्यभोगसंभार तापसीवेधारिणी ।

चकार पुर्जनं देह्या: प्रियदर्शनलासमा ॥ 56 ॥

कालेन क्रियता तुहा प्रत्यक्षं दर्शनं दही ।

सीम्यरूपधारा देही वरदा हंसवाहित्री ॥ 57 ॥

Thus Indrānī, with a view to see her husband, performed the worship of the Devi; she quitted all the articles of enjoyment and luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; thus some time passed away, when the Devi was pleased and appeared before her on the back of a swan, in Her peaceful form, ready to grant boons to Indrānī.

कोटिरूप्यैमिताकाण चन्द्रकोटिपुरीताल । 
विद्युक्तोदिसमानाभा चतुर्वैदसमयिता ॥ 58 ॥

She looked, then, fiery like thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedās personified began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides.

पाणांकुशाभयवरान्द्धती निजबाहुषि: । 

आपातलिङ्वी सख्यो भूभागालां च विभक्ती ॥ 59 ॥

Her two hands were adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two other hands made signs to grant boons and to discard all fear. The Vajjayanti garland of clear crystal-like gems suspended from Her neck up to Her feet.

प्रसत्रमेरवदना लोचनवयृषिता ।

आवह्याकोटजनना कंरणागृतसागरा ॥ 6 0 ॥

Her face was adorned with smiles and signs as if she would grant favours. She had three eyes and was the ocean of mercy and the Mother of all the Jivas from a worm up to Brahmā.

अंतक्रोटिवहाण्डवानीवका परमेश्वी ।

सीयानन्तसैयुक्तसन्तव्यविराजता ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्वेश्री च सर्वजा कुर्त्यक्षास्त्रिपी ॥

तभापुबाप प्रसन सा श्रकपर्नी कृतोघामपु ॥ 6 2 ॥

मेघर्भभीराष्ट्रेन मुदमाद्वतीं घृष्णा ।

Her two heavy breasts were filled with unbounded ocean of necter-like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the Goddess of innumerable worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest, endowed with all the knowledge and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and Immovable Brahma. The Devi, then, began to address Śaṃ, the wife of Indra, in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder.

देख्यावाच

वरं वरय सुशोषी वाजिछंज शक्रवल्पे ॥ ६३ ॥

ददायध्य प्रसत्रात्सि प्रवृत्ता सुभृर्ण तवया ।

वराद्राई समायाता दर्जनें सहर्न न मे ॥ ६४ ॥

अनेककोटिज्ञानोयापुणवर्षोहिति लपयते ।

The Devi said: O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your desired boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful One! I have come here

to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy task; by the collected merits, acquired in thousands and thousands of births one is able to See Me.

इलुक्ता सा तदा देवी तामह प्रणत गुरु: ॥ 65 ॥

शक्रपती भगवर्ती प्रसर्जा परमेश्वीम् ।

वाऊषामि दर्शनं मात: पत्यु: परमदुर्लंभम् ॥ 66 ॥

नसुषाद्वमाणं च स्वपट्राणणं तथा ।

Hearing the words of the Devi, Śaci Devi, the wife of Indra, fell prostrate before Her feet and began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavati, Who seemed graciously pleased: "O Mother! I now desire from Thee, that I may see my husband whom I attained after great difficulty, that I be freed from the fear arising out of King Nahuṣa and I want that Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was before.

देश्वाच

गछ्छ त्वमनया दूत्या साद्धं श्रीमानसं सर: ॥ 67 ॥

यत्र मे भूतिंरवता विश्वकामाधिभ्य मता ।

तत्र पश्यसि शक्र कं त्व दुः पित्ति भगविष्ठतम् ॥ 68 ॥

मोह्रियायामि राजानं कालेन क्रियात पुनः ।

The Devi said: “O Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My messenger (Dūtī) to Mānasarovara; there is installed My fixed form, named Viśvakāmā. You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful and overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahuṣa within a very short period.

स्वस्था भव विशालाक्र कांगीम तव चौरितम् ॥ 69 ॥

भंशियद्वीम प्रभुलं मोहितं विद्वासान्न ।

O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil your desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat of Indra.

व्यास उवाच

देवीदूती तां गृहीता शक्रिन्ती ल्याचित्वा ॥ 70 ॥

प्रायवासास साक्रिस्थे स्वयतयु: परयेक्षीय ।

सा दूद्वा तं पर्ने वाला सुरेंगं गुप्तसंस्थितम् ।

मुदितास मुक्तरं वीक्ष्य बहुकातभिवाडितुम् ॥ 71 ॥

इति श्रीमदैधीगवाते महापुराणे घटकल्भे शकदर्शनें

नामाग्रोगेस्थाय: 11 8 11

Book VI Chapter IX

Vyāsa said: The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger of the Devi and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. She was very pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the state of disguise.

Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Bhagavati by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VI Chapter IX

