[Ch 8 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken refuge under Brhaspati, the King Nahuṣa became very angry with Brhaspati and spoke to the Devas: “O Devas! I hear that the stupid son of Angirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept her in his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken refuge under Brihaspati, the King Nahuṣa became very angry towards Brihaspati and spoke to the Devas :-- “ O Devas! I hear that the stupid son of Aṅgirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept her in his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.”

[Ch 8 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the terrible Nahuṣa thus angry, the Devas and Rṣis consoled him and said: O King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive of yours.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the terrible Nahuṣa thus angry, the Devas and Ṛṣis consoled him and said :-- O King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive yours.

[Ch 8 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See, the Rşis, in all the Dharma Śāstras, have declared the holding of illicit connection with others' wives as a very heinous crime and have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter of Pulomā is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very good-natured.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See, the Ṛṣis in all the Dharma Śāstras, have declared the holding of illicit connection with other’s wives as a very heinous crime and have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter of Pulomā is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very good-natured.

[Ch 8 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can she, when her husband is alive, take another husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and hence the Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you acts irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can she, when her husband is alive, take another husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and hence the Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you act irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation.

[Ch 8 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One who is a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides there are many other celestial woman in this Heaven as beautiful as Śacī; you can satisfy your thirst with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One who is a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides there are many other celestial women in this Heaven as beautiful as Śacī; you can satisfy your thirst with them.

[Ch 8 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mutual love is recognised by the wise as the true originator of amorous dealings; ravishing a women by force destroys all amorous sentiments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mutual love is recognised by the wise as the true originator of amorous dealings; ravishing a woman by force destroys all amorous sentiments.

[Ch 8 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! And if the mutual love be similar and equal in all respects, then comes the true happiness; you have now got the post of Indra; therefore quit this idea of holding illicit connection with other's wives and indulge in other good thoughts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! And if the mutual love be similar and equal in all respects, then comes the true happiness; you have now got the post of Indra; therefore quit this idea of holding illicit connection with other’s wives and indulge in other good thoughts.

[Ch 8 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Demerits destroy prosperity and merits increase it. Therefore, O King! Leave all these bad thoughts and make your heart take a good turn and be happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Demerits destroy prosperity and merits increase it. Therefore, O King! Leave all these bad thoughts and make your heart take a good turn and be happy.

[Ch 8 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nahuṣa said: “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole away the wife of Bhraspati?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nahuṣa said :-- “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole

[Ch 8 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is easy to give advice to others but to act according to that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified Devi come to me; you will derive much benefit from it and the Devi, too, will get Her highest happiness; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is easy to give advice to others but to act according to that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified Devī come to me you will derive much benefit from it and the Devī, too, will get Her highest happiness; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 8 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I tell you truly that in no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrānī here quickly, whether by good words or by force.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I tell you truly that in no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrānī here quickly, whether by good words or by force.”

[Ch 8 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahuṣa, smitten by the Cupid's arrows, got terrified and said: "We will bring Indrānī to you by gentle words." Saying thus, they went to the house of Brhaspati.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahuṣa, smitten by the Cupid’s arrows, got terrified and said :-- “We will bring Indrānī to you by gentle words.” Saying thus, they went to the house of Brihaspati.

[Ch 8 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas, going to the house of Brhaṣpati, spoke thus with folded hands: O Guru! We know that Indrānī has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her over today to the king Nahuṣa, for we all united have made over the post of Indra to Nahuṣa. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and worship him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Devas, going to the house of Brihaspati, spoke thus with folded hands :-- O Guru! We know that Indrānī has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her over today to the king Nahuṣa for we all united have made over the post of Indra to Nahuṣa. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and worship him.

[Ch 8 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brhaspati said to them: "O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her husband, has now taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with her."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brihaspati said to them :-- “O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her husband, has now taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with her.”

[Ch 8 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: "O Guru! Kindly advise thence—if you do not part with Śacī Devī—how the king Nahuṣa is to be pleased; if he becomes angry, it will then by very difficult to please him."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- “O Guru! Kindly advise then - if you do not part with Śacī Devī - how the king Nahuṣa be pleased; if he becomes angry, it will then be very difficult to please him.”

[Ch 8 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brhapsati said: "O Devas! Let Śacī now go to Nahuṣa, and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when her husband's death will be known to her, she will then accept Nahuṣa as her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► said :-- “O Devas! Let Śacī now go to Nahuṣa, and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when her husband’s death will be known to her, she will then accept Nahuṣa as her husband.

[Ch 8 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How could she accept another husband when her husband was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of her high-souled husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How could she accept another husband when her husband was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of her high-souled husband.

[Ch 8 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Let Sāci thus make condition with him and, thus deceiving him, let her try her best to bring back her husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Let Śacī thus make condition with him and, thus deceiving him, let her try her best to bring back her husband.

[Ch 8 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Then, after coming to this conclusion, Bhraspati and other Devas went with Indrānī to the king Nahuṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Then, after coming to this conclusion, Brihaspati and other Devas went with Indrānī to the king Nahuṣa.

[Ch 8 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing them come, especially looking at Indrānī, the artificial king Nahuṣa became very glad and said to Indrānī:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing them come, especially looking at Indrānī the artificial king Nahuṣa became very glad and said to Indrānī :--

[Ch 8 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'O Beloved Today I am become the real Indra. O beautiful eyed One! Worship me as your husband; see the Devas now have made me to be worshipped by all the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Beloved! Today I am become the real Indra. O beautiful-eyed One! Worship me as your husband; see the Devas now have made me to be worshipped by all the gods.”

[Ch 8 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Nahuṣa spoke thus, the Devi Śaci became filled with great shame; she began to tremble and said to the king: "O Lord of the Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you. Better wait till I ascertain whether Indra is dead or alive, there is this doubt in my heart whether he lives or whether he is dead.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Nahuṣa spoke thus, the Devī Śacī became filled with great shame; she began to tremble and said to the king :-- “O Lord of the Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you. Better wait till I ascertain whether Indra is dead or alive, there is this doubt in my heart whether he lives or whether he is dead.

[Ch 8 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King of kings! Let me, first of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait till then. I tell this truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will worship you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King of kings! Let me, first of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait till then. I tell this truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will worship you.

[Ch 8 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I do not know else." When Śacī Devi spoke thus, Nahusa became very glad and saying "let it be so" dismissed her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► else.” When Śacī Devī spoke thus, Nahuṣa became very glad and saying “let it be so” dismissed her.

[Ch 8 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus having received permission from the King to depart, Śaci hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their best to bring Indra back as soon as possible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus having received permission from the King to depart, Śacī hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their best to bring Indra back as soon as possible.

[Ch 8 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing these sweet and holy words of Indrānī, the Devas intently consulted with each other how they could get back Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing these sweet and holy words of Indrānī the Devas intently consulted with each other how they could get back Indra.

[Ch 8 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then went to Vaikuntha and began to praise with hymns the original Deva, the God Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, king to those that seek His refuge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then went to Vaikunṭha and began to praise with hymns the original Deva, the God Viṣṇu, the Lord of the Universe, kind to those that seek His refuge.

[Ch 8 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas, skilled in speaking, spoke to Viṣṇu with a very troubled heart: "O Lord! Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much troubled with his sin Brahmatahyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas, skilled in speaking, spoke to Viṣṇu with a very troubled heart :-- “O Lord! Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much troubled with his sin Brahmahattyā.

[Ch 8 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where is he staying now, invisible to all the beings? O Lord! He is overcome with the sin Brahmatahyā by killing Vṛtra, the best of the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where is he staying now, invisible to all the beings? O Lord! He is now overcome with the sin Brahmahattyā by killing Vṛtra, the best of the Brāhmins.

[Ch 8 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We ask your skilful and intelligent advise. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him as well as of us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly shew us the way how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult crisis."
NEW CORR ENG ──► We ask your skilful and intelligent advice. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him as well as of us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly show us the way how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult crisis.”

[Ch 8 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the pitiful words of the Devas, Viṣṇu said: Let Indra perform the ASvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the purification of his sins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the pitiful words of the Devas, Viṣṇu said :-- Let Indra perform the Aśvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the purification of his sins.

[Ch 8 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By this Yajña, that can destroy all sins, Indra will be purified and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► By this Yajña, that can destroy all sins, Indra will be purified and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 8 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The more so because the Devi, the Universal Mother, will be pleased with his Horse sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, Brahmatahyā and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The more so because the Devī, the Universal Mother, will be pleased with his Horse sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, Brahmahattyā and others.

[Ch 8 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lo! Merely remembering Her destroys heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse sacrifice, She is pleased, what wonder is there that sins of a more grave nature would be destroyed!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lo! Merely remembering Her destroys heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse sacrifice, She be pleased, what wonder is there that sins of a more grave nature would be destroyed!

[Ch 8 Verse 42-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And let Indrānī worship Bhagavatī daily; happiness will undoubtedly be gained by worshipping that most Auspicious One! By this the King Nahusa will be particularly deluded by the World Mother and will then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by himself. And Indra, purified by Aśvamedha, will soon regain his position and all his wealth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And let Indrānī worship Bhagavatī daily; happiness will undoubtedly be gained by worshipping that most Auspicious One! By this the King Nahuṣa will be particularly deluded by the World Mother and will then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by himself. And Indra, purified by Aśvamedha, will soon regain his position and all his wealth.

[Ch 8 Verse 45-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial words of Viṣṇu of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the spot, where resided Indra. Brhaspati and the other Devas consoled the distressed Indra and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse sacrifice the greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin Brahmahattyā amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial words of Viṣṇu of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the spot, where resided Indra. Brihaspati and the other Devas consoled the distressed Indra and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse sacrifice the greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin Brahmahattyā amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth.

[Ch 8 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra became again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and uneasiness, abided by the time and remained there invisible in the tubular stem of the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas started from there and reached their own abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra became again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and uneasiness, abided by the time and remained there invisible in the tubular stem of the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas started from there and reached their own abodes.

[Ch 8 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The daughter of Puloma, suffering from her breeavements of Indra, spoke then to Brhaspati with great sorrow: "O Lord! Why is my husband still invisible to me, when he has performed the Aśvamedha sacrifice? Kindly shew me the way how I do can get a sight of him."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The daughter of Pulomā, suffering from her bereavements from Indra, spoke then to Brihaspati with great sorrow :-- “O Lord! Why is my husband still invisible to me, when he has performed the Aśvamedha sacrifice? Kindly show me the way how I can get a sight of him.”

[Ch 8 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhraspati said: “O Devi! Worship the most Auspicious Bhagavati; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will see him.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brihaspati said :-- “O Devī! Worship the most Auspicious Bhagavatī; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will see him.

[Ch 8 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Ambikā, the Upholdress of the Universe, will desist the King Nahuṣa from doing the wrongful act and it is She that will delude him by Her Māyā and get his downfall from the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Ambikā, the Upholdress of the Universe, will desist the King Nahuṣa from doing the wrongful act and it is She that will delude him by Her Māyā and get his downfall from the Heavens.

[Ch 8 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When Brhaspati spoke thus, Śacī Devi got initiated by him in the Devi Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. Thus getting the Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the Devi Bhuvanesvari duly with flowers, sacrificial victims and other necessary articles for worship.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When Brihaspati spoke thus, Śacī Devī got initiated by him in the Devī Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. Thus getting the Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the Devī Bhuvane’svarī duly with flowers, sacrificial victims and other necessary articles for worship.

[Ch 8 Verse 55-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Indrānī, with a view to see her husband, performed the worship of the Devi; she quitted all the articles of enjoyment and luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; thus some time passed away, when the Devi was pleased and appeared before her on the back of a swan, in Her peaceful form, ready to grant boons to Indrānī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Indrānī, with a view to see her husband, performed the worship of the Devī; she quitted all the articles of enjoyment and luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; thus some time passed away, when the Devī was pleased and appeared before her on the back of a Swan, in Her peaceful form, ready to grant boons to Indrānī.

[Ch 8 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She looked, then, fiery like thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedās personified began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She looked, then, fiery like thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedas personified began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides.

[Ch 8 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her two hands were adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two other hands made signs to grant boons and to discard all fear. The Vajjayanti garland of clear crystal-like gems suspended from Her neck up to Her feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her two hands were adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two other hands made signs to grant boons and to discard all fear. The Vaijayantī garland of clear crystal-like gems suspended from Her neck up to Her feet.

[Ch 8 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her face was adorned with smiles and signs as if she would grant favours. She had three eyes and was the ocean of mercy and the Mother of all the Jivas from a worm up to Brahmā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her face was adorned with smiles and signs as if she would grant favours. She had three eyes and was the ocean of mercy and the Mother of all the Jīvas from a worm up to Brahmā.

[Ch 8 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her two heavy breasts were filled with unbounded ocean of necter-like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the Goddess of innumerable worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest, endowed with all the knowledge and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and Immovable Brahma. The Devi, then, began to address Śaṃ, the wife of Indra, in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her two heavy breasts were filled with unbounded ocean of nectar-like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the Goddess of innumerable worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest, endowed with all the knowledges and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and Immoveable Brahmā. The Devī, then, began to address Śacī, the wife of Indra, in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder.

[Ch 8 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your desired boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful One! I have come here to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy task; by the collected merits, acquired in thousands and thousands of births one is able to See Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your desired boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful One! I have come here to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy task; by the collected merits, acquired in thousands and thousands of births one is able to See Me.

[Ch 8 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the Devi, Śaci Devi, the wife of Indra, fell prostrate before Her feet and began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavati, Who seemed graciously pleased: "O Mother! I now desire from Thee, that I may see my husband whom I attained after great difficulty, that I be freed from the fear arising out of King Nahuṣa and I want that Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the words of the Devī, Śacī Devī, the wife of Indra, fell prostrate before Her feet and began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavatī, Who seemed graciously pleased :-- “O Mother! I now desire from Thee, that I may see my husband whom I attained after great difficulty, that I be freed from the fear arising out of King Nahuṣa and I want that Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was before.”

[Ch 8 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: “O Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My messenger (Dūtī) to Mānasarovara; there is installed My fixed form, named Viśvakāmā. You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful and overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahuṣa within a very short period.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- “O Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My messenger (Dūtī) to Mānasarovara; there is installed My fixed form, named Viśvakāmā. You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful and overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahuṣa within a very short period.

[Ch 8 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil your desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil your desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat of Indra.”

[Ch 8 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger of the Devi and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. She was very pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the state of disguise. Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Bhagavati by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in the Mahāpurānam, Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger of the Devī and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. She was very pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the state disguise. Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the Bhagavatī by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in the Mahāpurāṇam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
