CHAPTER XXXI

On the Death of Šumbha

व्यास उवाच

इति तेषां वचः शुत्वा शुभ्यो दैत्यपतिस्तदा ।

उवाच सैनिकानाशु कोपाकृतिलतलोचनः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śumbha, the Lord of the Daityas, hearing the words of the soldiers, began to say, then, with eyes rolling with anger.

शुभ्म उवाच

जात्या: किं दूत तुवाँर्थे कृत्वा जीवितुयुले ।

नित्य सचिवाय्प्रात्रिलैंकजो विचारामि किम् ॥ 2 ॥

Śumbha said: "O Fools! What are you saying

all this? How can I do this unspeakably mean act and then hope to live? How shall I be able to roam in this world when I have become the cause in the slaying of my brothers and ministers?

कालः कर्ता शुभानो राजभुभानो बलवततः ।

का चित्ता मम दुवरि तस्मिहोगोउध्यकपके ॥ ३ ॥

Time is the more powerful cause of all that takes place, good or bad; so when this formless Time is the Supreme Ruler, what use is there in my brooding over the result?

Book V Chapter XXXI

यद्वयिति तद्वयत् यत्कोतिति करोतु तत् ।

न मे चिन्ताजसित कुजापि यमणाजीविनताया ॥ 4 ॥

Let whatever come that is inevitable, let whatever be done that is destined to take place; death or life, I do not think of either.

स कालोउपन्यथा कर्तु भावितो नेशते कवचित् ।

न कर्षिति च पर्नयः श्रावणे मासि सर्वदा ॥ 5 ॥

The more so when Time is never able, even when worshipped, to thwart off death or life when their proper moment arrives.

कदापिभागीर्णिरें वा पोरे माघेउध फालुने ।

अकाले वर्षतीवाशु तस्मामुख्यो न चास्तवम् ॥ 6 ॥

See! The God of rain gives up rain in the rainy season; but, it is seen that sometimes it does not rain in the month of Śrāvaṇa (the rainy season); whereas it rains sometimes in the month of Agrahāyaṇa, Pausa, Māgha, or Phālguṇa (not the rainy season).

कालो निमित्मात्रां तु दैवं हि बलवतस्म।

दैवेन निर्मितं सर्वे नान्यथा घबतीत्वः ॥ 7 ॥

Therefore it is evident that Time is not the chief factor. Fate is stronger than Time; Time is merely the instrumental cause.

दैवमेव परं मन्ये चित्यभीरमवर्गकम् ।

जेता यः सर्वदेवानां निर्याम्योउपन्यथा हतः ॥ 8 ॥

It is this Fate that has created all this universe; it cannot be rendered otherwise. I consider Fate as Supreme; Fie on this one's own exertion! For, Lo! Niśumbha, who had before conquered all the Devas, is slain today by an ordinary woman!

त्काबीजो महापुरः सोर्धि नागं गतो यदा ।

तदाई कौतिंमुचूज्य जीवितागां कोमीय किम् ॥ 9 ॥

Alas! When Raktabīja, too, had been slain, how can I desire to hold on to my life, foregoing all my name and fame!

प्राप्ते काले स्वयं बढ़ा पराध्रियसामिति ।

निधयं चाति तरसा जागक्तां स्वयं प्रभुः ॥ 10 ॥

Even Brahmā, who has created all this universe, will not sooner come to an end than his longevity expires.

चतुरुंपासहरं तु बढ़ाणो विद्ये किल ।

पतन्ति भवानतरंच नव चेज्ञतला युन: ॥ १ १ ॥

तथैव द्विगुणो विद्यूर्मराणायोपकल्पते ।

तथैव द्विगुणो काले शड़ूः शान्तिमेति च ॥ १ २ ॥

Four thousand Yugas constitute one day of Brahmā; and in that one day fourteen Indras perished; so twice the life of Brahmā constitute the life of Viṣnū; similarly twice the life period of Viṣnū constitutes the life period of Maheśa; and when their longevity expire, they come to an end.

का चित्ता मरणे मुहा निश्छले दैर्विनिति ।

मही महीधाराणां च नाशः सूर्यशगाङ्गवोः ॥ 13 ॥

This visible earth, mountains, sun and moon all will perish; so it has been specially ordained by the Destiny; therefore, O Fools! I do not care a bit for death.

जातस्य हि धुवं मृत्युधुवं जन्म मृतस्य च ।

अधुउेस्मिज्ञगीरे तु स्थणीयं यथा: स्थितम् ॥ 14 ॥

When a being is born, he must die; and when anyone dies, he will be born again, there is no doubt in this.

रथो मे कल्यन्ता शीर्भ गमिष्यामि रणाजिरः ।

जयो वा मरणं वारि भवत्वशैद वैतः ॥ 15 ॥

So one ought to preserve one's name and fame which is more permanent in this transitory body. Prepare my chariot; I will go today to the battlefield; let victory or defeat come as it may, as Fate has ordained. I will soon go to fight."

इत्युक्त्वा सैनिकाऊयुंपो यद्यमाध्यय सत्यतः ।

प्रयवादाधिक्वा यत्र संश्रिता तु हिमाभलने ॥ १ ६ ॥

Thus saying, Śumbha mounted on the chariot quickly and went where the Devi Ambika was staying. Then the four-fold army, cavalry, infantry, chariots, horses and elephants and innumerable soldiers, followed him with weapons in their hands.

सैन्य प्रचलितं तस्य संगे तत्र चतुविधम् ।

हल्पस्थायपादातिरमंयुतं सायुधं बड़ु ॥ 17 ॥

Going there to the Himalaya mountain, he saw the Divine Mother sitting on Her Lion. She

appeared so very lovely as to enchant the three worlds.

तत्र गलाड़चेल शुभ्मः संशितां जगद्धिककाम् ।

शैलैकवमोहीनी कान्तापय्यत्सिंह्वाहिनीम् ॥ 18 ॥

सर्वापरणभूषात्घां सर्वलक्षणासंरुताम् ।

स्तूयमातं सुरैः ख्वर्थीन्धर्वेयक्षिकरोः ॥ 19 ॥

Her body was decorated with various ornaments, all the auspicious gems were manifest; the Devas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas and Kinnaras in the heavens were all worshipping Her with hymns and Pārijāta flowers, and the Devi was making beautiful sounds with bells and conches, indicative of Her victory.

पुर्थेध पूच्यमानां च मन्दारपादपोद्बरैः ।

कुर्णिणां गंखिनन्दे चफटनादं मनोहस्म् ॥ 20 ॥

दूद्वा तां मोहस्मामद्वृष्मः कामविवाहितः ।

पडबाणाहतः कामं मनसा समर्पितयद् ॥ 21 ॥

Seeing Her Śumbha was very much enchanted with passionate love and struck with, the five arrows of cupid, thought thus: How wonderful is Her lovely countenance! See! How wonderful and amazing is Her skilfulness! Delicacy and capability to endure the hardships of war, though quite contrary to each other, are both in Her.

अंही रूपमिदं स्यमगहो चातुर्धयेबुतम् ।

सौकुमार्य च धैर्य च परस्यरिवीध यत् ॥ 22 ॥

What a wonder is this! Her bodies are extremely delicate and limbs are lean and thin; besides She is lately blooming into womanhood; still She does not feel any passion; this is undoubtedly very wonderful!

सुकुमाराशतितन्यंगी सदा: प्रकटयीवना ।

चित्रप्रेतदसी बाला कामभावविर्वित्ति ॥ 23 ॥

कामकान्तासमा रूपे सर्वलक्षणलक्षिता ।

जचिकेकं पिकित्त हौत सर्वान्महावल्न् ॥ 24 ॥

She is exquisitely beautiful that can be desired of in one's mind; and though She is endowed with all the auspicious signs, yet She has no inclinations for all the pleasure and allurements of the world and is now slaying the powerful Asuras; this is wonderful indeed!

उपायः को3त्र कर्तेल्यो येन मे वर्गगा भयेत् ।

न मन्त्रा वा मरालाड़ीरामायेन सत्रिषी मम ॥ 25 ॥

Now what steps are to be taken so that this Lady comes under my control? All the Mantrams also are not with me now to bring over this Swan-eyed Lady unto me.

सर्वेनमयी होषा मोहिनी मदार्षिति ।

सुन्दरीयं कवं मे स्याहजगना वरवर्गिनी ॥ 26 ॥

पातालगमनं मेउत्र न युक्तं समरांगणत् ।

सामदानविषयेक्ष्य तेयं साधया महावला ॥ 27 ॥

This proud lovely Lady is the incarnate of all Mantrams; how will She come under my control? This heroic Lady cannot be controlled by conciliatory words, allurements, dissensions; it is not advisable, too, to fly away from the battle-field and to go to Pātāla.

किं कतवैल्व चान्तव्य विषये समुपस्थिते ।

मरणं नोतमं चात्र स्कीकृतं तु यशोप्रदात् ॥ 28 ॥

मरणं श्रक्रिधितः प्रोक्ते संगरे मेगलास्यदात् ।

यत्तस्मानवलयोर्धियोर्धियते। किल ॥ 29 ॥

What am I to do? Where shall I go in this critical moment? And if I die at the hands of this Lady, that death is not a glorious one; it will take away my fame. The death in a battle-field is conducive to one's well being, so the sages say, when both the parties are equally strong.

प्रातयेरे दैर्वत्तिता नारी नरशतोतमा ।

नाशायास्कुलस्येह सर्वधात्रतिकाराजकला ॥ 30 ॥

दृषा किं सामवाक्यानि मय योज्यानि साम्यान् ।

हननायागत होषा किं तु सामना प्रसीदिति ॥ 31 ॥

The Devas have created this Lady stronger than even hundred strong men; She is a woman merely in name. This Lady is very powerful and has come here to destroy the Dānavas; there is no doubt in this. What effect will conciliatory words now produce on Her; She has come to slay us; Will She be appeased with good words?

न दानैश्रातिर्तुं योग्य नानागस्विध्यपिता ।

येवसूत विफलः कामं सर्वदेववशानुगा ॥ 32 ॥

Neither will allurements of precious things be

Book V Chapter XXXI

of any avail, for She is decked with various arms and weapons; nor will it be of any use to sow dissensions between the Devas and Her. Further all the Devas are under Her control.

तस्मातु मरणो श्रेयो न संग्रामे पतयवन् ।

जयो वा मरणं वाउँ घावलेवे यथाविधि ॥ 33 ॥

Therefore it is far better to die than to fly; victory or death would come unto me today as Fate has ordained.

व्यास उवाच

इति संवैल्यानः स गुणः सचाशितोभवत् ।

युद्धाय सुश्रियो भूत्वा तापुवावा पुरः स्थितम् ॥ 34 ॥

देवि युध्यव कान्तेउ ह्यावाउं ने परिघमः ।

मूर्जा5स किल नारीणां नायं धर्मः कदाचन ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus thinking in his mind, Sumbha became ready to shew his strength; and firmly resolved to fight, he said to the Devi before him: "O Devi! Fight. But, O One of delicate limbs! Thy so much toil is in vain. Thou hast no sense at all; for Thou art doing contrary to the doings of woman-kind.

नारीर्णा लोचने बाणा घुवावेव शरासनम् ।

हावभावासु शस्त्राणि पुर्णिलल्यं विवश्रण: ॥ 36 ॥

सत्राहुशागगोजंत्र रथधारी पनोरथः ।

मन्दप्राजित्यर्ने भेरीश्वदो नान्यः कदाचन ॥ 37 ॥

The pair of eyes of women are their arrows; the eyebrows are their bows; their gestures and postures are their weapons and their hits are those persons who are skilled in amorous love sentiments. The dyes used in painting the bodies are their amorous, their mental desires are their chariots, so sweet soft words and conversations are their trumpet sounds; women have no other things for their war preparations.

अन्याख्याणरी स्त्रीण विडवनमसंगयम् ।

तरजेदे भूषणं काने न च धार्थे कदाचन ॥ 38 ॥

Therefore, O Beloved! Any other weapons are mere mockeries and ridiculous; their modesty is their ornament; impudence can never grace them.

युध्यमाना वरा नारी कक्रीश्वामिपूषयते ।

स्तनी संगोपनीदी वा धनुषः कर्णी कयम् ॥ 39 ॥

An exquisitely beautiful woman, if engaged in a fight will look harsh; especially when Thou wilt draw Thy bow, how wilt Thou be able to hide Thy breasts?

केव मन्दामाने कुरा नदामादाय धावनम् ।

बुद्धिदा कालिका तेत्र चाणुषा परानीक्षा ॥ 40 ॥

When Thou wilt run with Thy club, where will Thy gentle treadings go? O Beautiful! Thy councillors are this Kalikā and the stupid Cāmundā.

चिषुकामान्यमध्यसा लालनेउपुस्वारा शिका ।

वाहनं मृगराडासे सर्वसत्तचयंकरः ॥ 41 ॥

Candikā is Thy adviser her voice is very hoarse; how can then she be able to nurse Thee? Again this Lion, the terror of all the beings, is Thy carrier. Therefore.

वीणानादं परित्यज प्रधटानादं करोषि यत् ।

रूपयौवियोः सर्वे विरोधि चरावर्धिनि ॥ 42 ॥

O Dear! Leave aside all these and come over unto me. O Beautiful One! That Thou art ringing Thy bells and dost not sound Thy lute goes quite against Thy beauty and youth.

यदि ते संगरेळधारित कुकराण भव भाभिनी ।

लप्योदी कुनखी कृतः ध्यक्षरणां विलेत्वाचे ॥ 43 ॥

लम्बयात इकुन्ची च माजार्चवनाकृति: ।

ईपुर्णं कल्पामाध्याय तिछा सुखे चिक्षा भव ॥ 44 ॥

O Sensitive One! If Thou likest to fight, better assume an ugly appearance, let Thy nature be ferocious and cruel; let Thy colour be black like a crow; lips elongated, legs long, nails ugly, teeth horrible, and let Thy eyes be ugly or yellow like those of a cat.

कर्कर्णं वचनं बृहि ततो सुद्धं करोम्यहम् ।

इंडूर्णीं सुदतीं दृष्टवा न मे पाणिगः प्रसीदिति ॥ 4 5 ॥

हनुं त्वां मृणागावासिंक कामकानोयेमे मृढे ।

O Devi! Assume such an ugly appearance and stand firmly for the fight. O Deer-eyed One! Speak first harsh words unto me; then I will fight with

Thee; my hand does not get up to strike Thee with handsome teeth, in the battle-field, Who art like a second Rati."

व्यास उवाच

इति बुवाणं कामार्तं बीक्ष्य तं जगद्धिष्का ॥ 4 6 ॥

सितपूर्विमिंदं वावस्यमुवाच भरतोतम ।

Vyāsa said: O Best of the descendants of Bharata! When Śumbha said thus, the Divine Mother, seeing him passionate, smiled and said:

देव्यवाच

किं विधीदसि मन्दात्मकामबाणवियोहितः ॥ 47 ॥

प्रेक्षाकार्ड स्थिता मूद कुरु कालिकया मृधम् ।

चामुपडया वा कुवेते तव योग्ये राणांगणे ॥ 48 ॥

प्रहरव यथाकामं नाई त्वां योद्मूलसहै ।

“O Stupid One! Why are you so much distressed with passion? O Fool! If your haud does not come forward to strike weapons at Me, then fight with this ugly Kālikā or Cāmuṇḍā; they are your best compeers in the battle-field; they will fight with you; I will stand as a mere Witness.

इन्युसना कालिकां प्राद देवी मयुर्या सिरा ॥ 49 ॥

जहोनं कालिके कृरे कुरूपप्रियमाहये ।

Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavati said to Kālika in sweet words: "O Kālika! Your nature is fierce; this Śumbha likes also the fierce; so kill him."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता कालिका कालप्रेति कालकपिणी ॥ 50 ॥

गदा प्रगृहा तस्या तस्यावाजी कृतोघाम ।

Vyāsa said: O King! That Kālika, the incarnate of Death, thus ordered, took up Her club immediately and became ready to fight, as if sent there direct by the God of Death.

तयोः परस्यं युद्धे बभूवातिभयानकम् ॥ 51 ॥

पश्यां सर्वैद्वानां मुनिनो च महात्यनाम् ।

A dreadful fight then ensued between the two; and the high-souled Munis and the Devas were present there and witnessed the great event.

गदामुहाय गृभभो3द जघान कालिकां रो ॥ 52 ॥

कालिका दैत्यसाजानं गदया न्यहनद्भुगम् ।

बर्भजास्य रथं चएडी गदाय कनकोज्ज्वलम् ॥ 53 ॥

खान्द्वता जघनागुं दाफकं दाफाग्वसना ।

Śumbha first struck at Kalikā, raising his club. Kalikā, then, struck Śumbha in return with her club violently. Instantly she made a dreadful sound, broke down his chariot, glittering like gold, into pieces, killed the horse of the chariot and slew the charioteer.

स पदातिर्वादो गुर्वीं समादाय कुधान्वितः ॥ 54 ॥

कालिकापुभवोमीये प्रहसान्तनता ।

Walking, then, on foot with a very heavy club in his hand, Śumbha struck with great anger on the breast of Kalikā and began to laugh.

वड्यचिता गदादारां खड्यामादाय सच्चा ॥ 55 ॥

चिच्छेदायभुंजस्वंसायुंचन्द्रान्धितम् ।

Kālikā, in the meanwhile, rendering his stroke useless, soon took up Her axe and cut off his left hand, pasted with sandal and decked with arms and weapons.

स छिड़बाहुविंशयो गदाणाणिः पारित्तुः ॥ 56 ॥

अधिरेष समानार्थ कालिकामहानत्तदा ।

His left hand thus cut off, his whole body was drenched with torrents of blood; yet he came up with club in his hand and struck Kalikā with it.

काली च कवालेत पुर्ज नस्याव दक्षिणम् ॥ 57 ॥

चिछ्छेउ प्रहस्नी सा सगदं किल सांगदम् ।

Kālika, too, laughed and with Her scimitar cut off his right arm holding the club and ornamented with armlet.

कर्तुं पादपूहरां स कुषितः प्रययौ जवात् ॥ 58 ॥

काली चिच्छेच्चे चरणी खड़ोगनाय त्वारीकता ।

Śumbha became angry and came up violently to kick Her when Kālīkā quickly cut off his two legs.

सच्छिकरणपाठ़ेपि सिंह तिक्षिति च बुच्न ॥ 59 ॥

धायमानो ययावाणु कालिका भीषयाश्रि ।

His arms and legs thus severed from his body, the Demon frightened Kālīkā and told Her. "Wait, wait." And soon he came up before Her.

तमापण्ड्तमालीकरण कालिका कमलोषमम् ॥ 60 ॥

चकर्त मलकं कंठादुघिरीयचहं घुगम् ।

Book V Chapter XXXII

Seeing the Demon coming, Kálikā severed his neck from his body like a lotus; blood began to gush out in continuous streams.

छिडेउसी मस्तके भूपी पपात गिरिसझिभः ॥ 61 ॥

प्राणा विनिर्यमुक्तस्य देहादुकन्मय सत्वम् ।

O King! The head of Šumbha, thus severed from his body, fell on the ground like a mountain. Immediately the life left the body.

तातपुं पत्ति देत्यं चूद्या देया: सवासना: ॥ 62 ॥

गुडुकुर्नां तदा वैधी वापुपां कालिकां नवा ।

Seeing the Dānava fell down lifeless, Indra and the other hosts of Devas began to worship the Devi Bhagavatī, Cāmunḍā, and Kālīkā and chanted lovely hymns to them.

ववुर्वाता: शिवास्तत्र दिशिक्ष विमला भूषणम् ॥ 63 ॥

वेपूवुक्षान्यो होमे प्रदक्षिणशिक्षा: शुभाः ।

The winds then began to blow pleasantly; all the quarters looked very clear and Fire in sacrificial altars, being circumambulated, became very propitious.

इतनेशेषा थे दैत्याः प्रणाय जगद्धिकवम् ॥ 64 ॥

त्वक्तानउदयुपानि ते सर्वे पातालं प्रययुँच ।

On the other hand, those Daityas that remained alive quitted their arms and weapons, bowed down to the Divine Mother, and fled away one and all to the Pātāla.

तृत्ते सर्वमाख्यानं देत्याश्रितमुत्तमम् ॥ 65 ॥

गृभाष्टीर्नां वधं चैव सुराणां रक्षणं तथा ।

O King! I have now described in regular order to you how the Devi protected the Devas and destroyed Sumbha and other Asuras.

एतदाख्यानकं सर्वे पठतिनं भुवि मानवाः ॥ 66 ॥

शुणतिने च सहा भवनया ते कृतावर्ण भवतिन हि ।

Those human beings on the surface of the earth that read this anecdote from the beginning to the very end or hear it constantly, get all their desires fulfilled; there is no doubt in this.

अपुजे तपते पुजार्धिंग्रंघ धर्न बहु ॥ 67 ॥

रोगी च मुचले रोगास्वी-कामानवायुगत ।

O King! Verily he gets a son who has not got any son; he gets abundance of wealth who is without any wealth; the diseased become cured of their diseases; what more can be said than the fact that he who hears this glorious deed of the Devi in its entirety, gets all that he desires.

शकुत्तो न भयं तत्य य इदं चरितं शुभम् ।

भूणीति पदते नित्यं मृतिमाज्ञावते नः ॥ 68 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पड्यसकन्धे

शुभ्यधौ नाम एकविंशोउधायः ॥ 69 ॥ 

O King! That man who reads daily this holy anecdote or hears it, has never to fear from his enemies; in addition he gets liberation after leaving his this body.

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book

on the death of Sumbha in the Mahā Purānam

Srimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXXII

