CHAPTER XXI

On the Killing of the Sons of Devaki

व्यास उवाच

अथ काते तु सम्पाठे देवकी चैदक्षिणी ।

गर्भ द्वारा विधिवसुदयेतेन सज्ञा ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus, in due course, Devaki, the goddess incarnate, being united according to rules with Vasudeva, became pregnant.

पूर्णर्ष द्वगभे मासे सुभुचे सुनभुत्तमम् ।

रूपावयवसम्पत्रे देवकी प्रथमं यदा ॥ 2 ॥

तदार3.6 वसुदेवस्ती सत्यावब्यानुगोपिति: ।

भात्विताच्च महाभागो देवकी देवमातरम् ॥ 3 ॥

वरोक समयं मे तं वं जानासि स्वसुतापणे ।

मोचिता तं महाभागो रणथवेन मया तदा ॥ 4 ॥

When full ten months were over, a good-looking

Book IV Chapter XXI

and beautiful child (male) was first born to Devakī. Then the good-natured Vasudeva remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by Heaven; and he spoke to Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair-looking! You know that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing on oath to deliver all your fresh-born children to Karīsa. Now has come the time to hand over your child to Karīsa.”

इन पुरं सुकैगानते दाख्यामि भातुभूने ।

'खले कंसे विनाशार्थ दैवे कि व कार्त्विति ।'

विविचकर्माणं पाको दुर्जीय हकृततमविः ॥ 5 ॥

O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Karīsa. Know Karīsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will take urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no hands in the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. Ordinary persons cannot know them.

सर्वेधां कित जीवानां कालपाणानुवर्तीनान् ।

भोक्त्यं स्वकृतं कर्मं रुषं वा यदि वातुगम् ।

प्रात्प्रा सर्वैवैयाज जीवस्य विधिभिनिम्न ॥ 6 ॥

All persons are subsect to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the merits or demerits of their deeds. The effects of past Karma are fashioned by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your child.

देवक्याच

स्वामिन्यूँ कृतं कर्म भोक्त्यं सर्वथा नृभि: ॥ 7 ॥

तीर्थेल्पोषिवर्दीवि कि न याति क्षयं ही तत ।

Devaki said: O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making generous gifts?

तिलितो धर्मशास्त्रे पायश्रितविधिनू प ॥8॥

यूर्वार्तिज्ञानां पाणानां विनाणाय महामर्भिः ।

ब्रहाहा हेमहारी न सुपायो गृतल्पतः ॥ 9 ॥

द्वारणाद्धते चौणें गुद्धि याति यतस्ततः ।

The high minded Maharjis have fixed rules and penances for destroying the sins of past deeds;

twelve years' vow to observe penances can purify one from sine e. g., Brāhimicide, stealing gold, drinking or stealing the wife of one's preceptor and many others.

मन्यात्रिपियोंहिंट्र प्रयाश्रतं चियानतः ॥ १ ० ॥

तथा कृत्वा नर: पाणमुच्येत वा न वाउनच ।

विगतिच्चानते किं मुनवस्त्चर्विंगतः ॥ १ १ ॥

याज्ञल्क्यादय सर्वे प्रंभाश्रप्रवर्तकाः ।

O Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by Manu or other Munis? If you don't accept penances to be sufficiently purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Maharsis, secers, Yajñavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy?

भवित्यं भवत्ये यद्यं निशयः प्रभो ॥ 12 ॥

आयुर्वैद् स प्रियेये मन्वादास्तवाश्रस्ताः ।

O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda (medicinal books) and Mantra vādas, the science and recitation of mantras or sacred formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false!

उद्यमन्तु वृथा सर्वमेवं चेईविनिर्मितम् ॥ 13 ॥

भवित्यं भवत्येव प्रवृत्तिस्तु निरर्थिका ।

अनिर्योमादिक व्यर्थ निवर्ते स्वर्गमाधानम् ॥ 14 ॥

यदा तत प्रमाणं हि वृथैव परिभावितम् ।

वितर्थे तत्प्रमाणे तु प्रभोच्छे: कृतो न हि ॥ 15 ॥

उद्यो च कृते सिंहिटुः प्रवर्धक्षेणे साध्यते ।

तत्सादप्र प्रकर्तेल्यः प्रपंचश्रितकल्पित्यः ॥ 16 ॥

यथायं वालकः क्षेमं प्राप्नोति मम पुक्रकः ।

If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect can come out of any efforts; so all effort are reduced to no effect. If what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use of taking recourse to any action and Agniṣtoma sacrifices etc., that are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God's

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason why the whole Dharma will not be destroyed.

Note: Fate is here denounced.

मिया यदि प्रकर्तेयं वचनं शुभमिच्छता ॥ 17 ॥

न तत्र दूषणं किंचित्यबटिनं मनोषिणः ।

Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any exertion is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out some means to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a good way of preserving the life of this new born baby.

The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can there by save a life, and have honest motive for the welfare of all.

Note: Here is a diplomatic statement!

སྭུམ་ཆེན་ཆེན་

निरुभाय महापभो सत्यमेतदुब्बीम ते ॥ 18 ॥

Vasudeva said: O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and the matters connected with truth.

उपम: खलु कतिथः फलं दैवबयानुगम् ।

त्रिविधानीह कर्माणि संसारोउर पुराविदः ॥ १९ ॥

प्रवदनीते जीवानां पुराणोधामायेषु च ।

सँखितानि च जीणानि प्राक्याति सुमध्यमे ॥ २० ॥

वर्तमानाति वामोक शिवधानीह देहिनाम् ।

Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly the duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or Fate. The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds of Karma mentioned in the Purāṇas and Āgamas: First, the Sañcita Karma (done in past births); the Prārabdha Karma, the Karma already done; and the Vartamāna Karma (Karma in hand).

शुभागुभानि कर्माणि बीजभूतानि यानि च ॥ 21 ॥

बहुजन्ममुच्यानि काले निर्घ्ति सर्वथा ।

The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous lives and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a human soul. Urged on by this Karma, the Jivas quitting their previous bodies, enjoy Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own acts.

पूर्वदेंहं परित्यज्ञ जीवः कर्मवशानुगः ॥ 22 ॥

खर्गा वा नरकं वार्थि प्राप्नोति स्वकृतेन वै ।

दिख्ये देहं च सम्याय यातनादेहमर्थजम् ॥ 23 ॥

According to their good or bad works, the Jivas acquire the higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heaven, or they take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in hell.

भूनक्ति विविधान्योगान्ययं वा नरकेशवा ।

भोगान्ते च यदोत्पत्ते: समयस्तस्य जायते ॥ 24 ॥

लिंगवद्रेल सहितं जायते जीवसंजित्मा ।

तैद्व सझितेभ्यछ कर्मभ्यः कर्मिभः पुनः ॥ 25 ॥

At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when there comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jiva becomes conscious of the subtle body (Línga Deha) and takes his birth again. When the Liūga Deha comes into existence, the part of the Karma done in various previous births that are ripe and ready to yield their fruits, gets attached to the Jiva by God (or Destiny).

योजयवेय तं कालं कांगिण प्राकृतिन च ।

देहनानेन भाव्यानि शुभानि चाजुपानि च ॥ 26 ॥

Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births always exists in a Jiva's body. O Fair-eyed One!—The effects of Prārabhda Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have to be experienced by a Jiva, whether happy or unhappy.

प्राख्यान च जीवेन भोक्त्यानि सुलोचने ।

प्रावश्छितेन नग्रयिति वर्तमानाति भामिनी ॥ 27 ॥

O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to rules, destroy the effects of Karmas that are in hand and are weak, (i.e. not yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms.)

सच्छितानि तर्वेषागु यवार्थ विंहितेन च ।

प्रायक्रमंणां भोगासंख्यो नान्यथा भवेदे ॥ 28 ॥

तेनायं ते कुमारो बे देवः कंसाय सर्वथा ।

The Prārabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts done in previous births are fully mature and ready to yield their fruits) cannot be

Book IV Chapter XXI

averted; their effects must have to be experienced and then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or any other remedial measures. Therefore you most hand over unconditionally your new born babe unto the hands of Karisa.

न विद्यावचनं मेप्रति लोकर्निदाधिपूत्थितम् ॥ 29 ॥

अतिवेअप्रिस्तु संसारो धर्मसोर महात्मनाम् ।

दैवाधीनं हि सर्वेषां मरणं जनन्त तथा ॥ 30 ॥

तस्माछ्कोक न कत्वेयो दैहिनां हि तिरायंकः ।

O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor have I told any lic. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over your baby. O Devaki! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in this fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons are subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jivas ought not to be sorry when there is no help for it.

सत्यं व्यस्य गतं कान्ते व्यथा तस्यैव जीवितम् । ३ १ ॥

इह लोकों गतो यमात्यरलोकः कृतस्ततः ।

O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come!

आगो दौहि सुतं सुषु कंसाय प्रद्याम्यहम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

सत्यसंस्तगहाँवि शुभमयो भविष्यति ।

Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over to Karīsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample rewards afterwards; there is no doubt in it.

कत्वील सुकृतं पुंभि: सुखे दुःखे सति प्रिय ॥ ३३ ॥

“सत्यसंक्षणाहिंहि शुभायेव भविष्यति ।”

Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jivas, there it is highly incumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can act according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits.

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तवित कान्ते सा देवकी शोकसंयुता ।

द्वौ पुत्र प्रसूतं च वेभयाना मनस्विनी ॥ 34 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the

husband of Devaki, who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the newly born baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of Vasudeva.

वसुचेदोर्पि धर्माना आदाय स्वसुतं शिशुम् ।

जगाम कंससदं मार्ग लोकेशिशुतः ॥ 35 ॥

The virtuous Vasudeva took that baby and went out to the Kamsa's palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very much astonished and began to praise him.

लोका कचुः

पर्यन्तु बसुदेवं घो लोका एवं मनस्विनम् ।

स्ववाक्यमनुक्छैव बालमादाय यात्यसी ॥ 36 ॥

मृत्यवे दातुकामोउढा सत्यवागनसूयक: ।

सफलं जीवितं चाख्य धार्मं पर्यवृते चाळूतम् ॥ 37 ॥

यः पुरं याति कंसाय दातुं कालात्मयेपि हि ।

The copla said: “O people! See how Vasudeva is sensible to keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Karīsa. This truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his son to the hands of Karīsa who is the Death Personified. See his wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.

व्यास उवाच

इति संन्यामानन्तु प्राप्तः कंसालयं वृप ॥ 38 ॥

ददावस्यैः कुमारं तं जातामात्रामानुम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Vasudeva, thus praised, reached; at last the Kamsa's palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kāṃsa.

कंसोप्र विस्तयं प्राणो दूद्वा धीरं महात्मनः ॥ 39 ॥

गृहीता बालकं प्राह सिमन्तुर्पिंद्ये वचः ।

धान्यस्तं श्रुपुत्राठ जातः पुत्रसमर्पणात् ॥ 40 ॥

मम भूतुर्नं चार्यं वै निरा प्रोक्त्नु चादभः ।

न हृत्वो यथा कामं बालोयं यातु ले गृह्म ॥ 41 ॥

अधमन्तु प्रदात्यस्त्वया पुत्रो महामते ।

The King Kañsa, too, was very much astonished to see this wonderful patience of Vasudeva. Then he held aloft the child and laughed and said: "O son of Śārasena: You have been blessed to-day by giving me your son just now. But the voice from

Srimaddevibhagavatam

Heaven said that your eighth son will be the cause of my death; this your first son is not my cause of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you can take your baby back to your home.

O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, when he will be born; I hope you will positively do it."

इत्युक्चा बसुदेवाय ददाव्या खल: शिशुम् ॥ 42 ॥

गच्छत्वयं गृहं बालः क्षेमं व्याहतवायूः ।

The cruel and wicked Karīsa returned the child and said: “Let this child go back safely to his home.”

तमादाय तत्न शीरितंगमा स्वगृह मुदा ॥ 43 ॥

कंसोप्री सचिवानाहं वृथा किं धातये शिशुम् ।

अध्यमादेवकीपुत्रामम मृत्युस्वहातः ॥ 44 ॥

अतः किं प्रवमं बालं द्वता पार्यं कौरामदम् ।

When the King Karisa said thus, Vasudeva, the son of Śūrasena gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King Karisa told his ministers: that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth son would be the cause of his death; and so there was no necessity to kill that child. There was no need to incur sin by killing the first child.

सभा साधिदिति तेयुक्वना संशिता मन्सिकसना:॥ 4 5 ॥

विसर्जितासु कंसेन जम्पुले स्वगृहान्यति ।

The ministers, hearing the king Kamsa's those words, began to praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly "Well done" "Well done." They went away to their respective ho.nes, when ordered to do so by Kanisa.

गतेषु तेषु सम्पातो नारदो मुनिसत्तम: ॥ 4 6 ॥

अभ्युद्यानार्ययाद्वादि चकारोरमुस्तत्वा ।

पगच्छ कुशलं राजा ततागमनकारणम् ॥ 47 ॥

नारदस्ते तदोवाच सिमतपूर्विमेदे वचः ।

कंस कंस महाभाग गतोईं हेमपर्वतम् ॥ 48 ॥

तत्र बह्रादायो देवा मन्त्र चक्रः समाहिताः ।

देवक्यां बसुदेवस्य भावांयां सुरास्तमः ॥ 49 ॥

Now Nārada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kaṇīsa. The king Kaṇīsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him water to wash his

mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped him dejectively and enquired of his wife—He then asked the Muni about the cause of his untimely arrival there. The Maharṣi Nārada then smilingly and with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kaṇisa,” “Kaṇisa” and then said, O blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru Mountain. There Brahmā and other gods formed an assembly and were thus thinking out plans that Viṣṇu, the Supreme God, would take His birth in the womb of Devakī, the wife of Vasudeva to kill Kaṇisa.

वराधरै तव शिष्यूघ जनं चात्र कतिष्यति ।

तत्कथे न हतः पुत्रत्वया नीति विज्ञाना ॥ ५० ॥

Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have you not killed the son of Vasudeva?

कंस उवाच

अष्टमं च हनिष्येड़ं मृत्युं मे देवभाषितम् ।

Karīsa said: "I will kill the eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice".

नात्र उवाच

न जानासि नृपश्रेष्ठ राजनीति शृभाशुभाम् ॥ ५ १ ॥

माघावर्न च देवानां न त्वे वैत्स वद्यामि किम् ।

Nārada said: O King! Now I understand that you do not understand any thing of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious results; especially when you are quite ignorant of the Māyā of the Devas, then what shall I say to you!

रिपुरलोप्रि गृहेणा नोरेश्वः शुभमिच्छता ॥ 52 ॥

सम्पेलनक्रियायां तु सर्वे ते ह्रहणाः स्मृतः ।

मूर्खल्वमरिसंलायाः कृतोर्धे जानता लवा ॥ 53 ॥

The truth is this: the warriors, looking after their own welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered: “the eighth son.” It means the children counted from the first and then finished upto eighth; it may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego your enemies: then why have you desisted in killing your enemy when you got

Book IV Chapter XXII

that enemy in your possession. Nothing is shewn of you in this act save dire foolishness, and ignorance.

इत्युक्वताउगु गतः श्रीमात्रायरे देवदर्जनः ।

गतेउव नारद केसः समाहूयाय बालकम् ।

पाणाणे पोथथामास सुरुखं प्राप च मन्त्यधीः ॥ ५४ ॥

इति शीमद्दौभाणवने महापुराणो चतुर्बिक्क्ये

एकानोबिंशोउथावः ॥ 55 ॥

Thus saying, the Maharṣī Nārada vanished quickly. Kaṃsa, of little understanding brought back the son of Vasudeva and killed him by dashing him against a stone and was relieved.

Note: This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the macrocosm. God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this human body also live the Devas and the Danavas. The left half of the body, the Idā side, is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the Pingālā side, is the seat of the Dānavas. In this body war is always going on between the Devas and Dānavas. Sometimes the Devas get victory; sometimes the Dānavas win. God is in the centre, the heart and controls the two.

Here ends the Twenty first Chapter of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyāsa, on the killing of the sons of Devakī.

Book IV Chapter XXII

