[Ch 21 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Thus, in due course, Devaki, the goddess incarnate, being united according to rules with Vasudeva, became pregnant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Thus, in due course, Devakī, the goddess incarnate, being united according to rules with Vāsudeva, became pregnant.

[Ch 21 Verse 2-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When full ten months were over, a good-looking and beautiful child (male) was first born to Devakī. Then the good-natured Vasudeva remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by Heaven; and he spoke to Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair-looking! You know that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing on oath to deliver all your fresh-born children to Karīsa. Now has come the time to hand over your child to Karīsa.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► When full ten months were over, a good-looking and beautiful child (male) was first born to Devakī. Then the good-natured Vāsudeva remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by Heaven; and he spoke to Devakī, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair-looking! You know that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing on oath to deliver all your fresh-born children to Kaṃsa. Now has come the time to hand over your child to Kaṃsa.”

[Ch 21 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Karīsa. Know Karīsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will take urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no hands in the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. Ordinary persons cannot know them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Kaṃsa. Know Kaṃsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will take, urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no hands in the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. Ordinary persons cannot know them.

[Ch 21 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All persons are subsect to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the merits or demerits of their deeds. The effects of past Karma are fashioned by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All persons are subject to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the merits or demerits of their past deeds. The effects of past Karma are fashioned by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your child.

[Ch 21 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Devaki said: O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making generous gifts?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Devakī said :-- O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making generous gifts?

[Ch 21 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The high minded Maharjis have fixed rules and penances for destroying the sins of past deeds; twelve years' vow to observe penances can purify one from sine e. g., Brāhimicide, stealing gold, drinking or stealing the wife of one's preceptor and many others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The high minded Maharṣis have fixed rules and penances for destroying the sins of past deeds; twelve yearś vow to observe penances can purify one from sins, e.g., Brāhminicide, stealing gold, drinking or stealing the wife of one’s preceptor and many others.

[Ch 21 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by Manu or other Munis? If you don't accept penances to be sufficiently purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Maharsis, secers, Yajñavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by Manu or other Munis? If you don’t accept penances to be sufficiently purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Maharṣis, seers, Yājñavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy?

[Ch 21 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda (medicinal books) and Mantra vādas, the science and recitation of mantras or sacred formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda (medicinal books) and Mantra vādas, the science and recitation of mantras or sacred formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false!

[Ch 21 Verse 13-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect can come out of any efforts; so all effort are reduced to no effect. If what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use of taking recourse to any action and Agniṣtoma sacrifices etc., that are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God's Śrimaddevībhāgavatam mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason why the whole Dharma will not be destroyed. Note: Fate is here denounced.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect can come out of any effort; so all efforts are reduced to no effect. If what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use of taking recourse to any action and Agniṣṭoma sacrifices, etc., that are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God’s mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason why the whole Dharma will not be destroyed. N.B. :-- Fate is here denounced.

[Ch 21 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any exertion is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out some means to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a good way of preserving the life of this new born baby. The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can there by save a life, and have honest motive for the welfare of all. Note: Here is a diplomatic statement! སྭུམ་ཆེན་ཆེན་
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any exertion is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out some means to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a good way of preserving the life of this new born baby. The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can thereby save a life, and have an honest motive for the welfare of all. Note :-- Here is a diplomatic statement!

[Ch 21 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasudeva said: O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and the matters connected with truth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vāsudeva said :-- O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and the matters connected with truth.

[Ch 21 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly the duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or Fate. The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds of Karma mentioned in the Purāṇas and Āgamas: First, the Sañcita Karma (done in past births); the Prārabdha Karma, the Karma already done; and the Vartamāna Karma (Karma in hand).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly the duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or Fate. The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds of Karma mentioned in the Purāṇas and Āgamas :-- First, the Sancita Karma (done in past births); the Prārabdha Karma, the Karma already done; and the Vartamān Karma (Karma in hand).

[Ch 21 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous lives and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a human soul. Urged on by this Karma, the Jivas quitting their previous bodies, enjoy Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own acts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous lives and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a human soul. Urged on by this Karma, the Jīvas quitting their previous bodies, enjoy Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own acts.

[Ch 21 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► According to their good or bad works, the Jivas acquire the higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heaven, or they take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► According to their good or bad works, the Jīvas acquire the higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heavens, or they take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in hell.

[Ch 21 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when there comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jiva becomes conscious of the subtle body (Línga Deha) and takes his birth again. When the Liūga Deha comes into existence, the part of the Karma done in various previous births that are ripe and ready to yield their fruits, gets attached to the Jiva by God (or Destiny).
NEW CORR ENG ──► At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when there comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jīva becomes conscious of the subtle body (Liṅga Deha) and takes his birth again. When the Liṅga Deha comes into existence, the part of the Karma done in various previous births that are ripe and ready to yield their fruits, gets attached to the Jīva by God (or Destiny).

[Ch 21 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births always exists in a Jiva's body. O Fair-eyed One!—The effects of Prārabhda Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have to be experienced by a Jiva, whether happy or unhappy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births always exists in a Jīva’s body. O Fair-eyed One! The effects of Prārabdha Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have to be experienced by a Jīva, whether happy or unhappy.

[Ch 21 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to rules, destroy the effects of Karmas that are in hand and are weak, (i.e. not yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to rules, destroy the effect of Karmas that are in hand and are weak (i.e., not yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms).

[Ch 21 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Prārabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts done in previous births are fully mature and ready to yield their fruits) cannot be averted; their effects must have to be experienced and then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or any other remedial measures. Therefore you most hand over unconditionally your new born babe unto the hands of Karisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Prārabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts done in previous births that are fully mature and ready to yield their fruits, cannot be averted; their effects must have to be experienced and then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or any other remedial measures. Therefore you must hand over unconditionally your new born babe unto the hands of Kaṃsa.

[Ch 21 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor have I told any lic. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over your baby. O Devaki! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in this fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons are subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jivas ought not to be sorry when there is no help for it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor have I told any lie. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over your baby. O Devakī! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in this fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons are subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jīvas ought not to be sorry when there is no help for it.

[Ch 21 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come!

[Ch 21 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over to Karīsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample rewards afterwards; there is no doubt in it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over to Kaṃsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample rewards afterwards; there is no doubt in it.

[Ch 21 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jivas, there it is highly incumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can act according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jīvas, there it is highly iñcumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can act according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits.

[Ch 21 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the husband of Devaki, who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the newly born baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of Vasudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus addressed by Vāsudeva, the husband of Devakī, who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the newly born baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of Vāsudeva.

[Ch 21 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The virtuous Vasudeva took that baby and went out to the Kamsa's palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very much astonished and began to praise him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The virtuous Vāsudeva took that baby and went out to the Kaṃsa’s palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very much astonished and began to praise him.

[Ch 21 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The copla said: “O people! See how Vasudeva is sensible to keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Karīsa. This truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his son to the hands of Karīsa who is the Death Personified. See his wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The people said :-- “O people! See how Vāsudeva is sensible to keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Kaṃsa. This truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his son to the hands of Kaṃsa who is the Death Personified. See his wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.”

[Ch 21 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Vasudeva, thus praised, reached; at last the Kamsa's palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kāṃsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Vāsudeva, thus praised, reached at last the Kaṃsa’s palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kaṃsa.

[Ch 21 Verse 39-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Kañsa, too, was very much astonished to see this wonderful patience of Vasudeva. Then he held aloft the child and laughed and said: "O son of Śārasena: You have been blessed to-day by giving me your son just now. But the voice from Heaven said that your eighth son will be the cause of my death; this your first son is not my cause of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you can take your baby back to your home. O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, when he will be born; I hope you will positively do it."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King Kaṃsa, too, was very much astonished to see this wonderful patience of Vāsudeva. Then he held aloft the child and laughed and said :-- “O son of Śūrasena, you have been blessed today by giving me your son just now. But the voice from Heaven said that your eighth son will be the cause of my death; this your first son is not my cause of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you can take your baby back to your home. O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, when he will be born; I hope you will positively do it.”

[Ch 21 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The cruel and wicked Karīsa returned the child and said: “Let this child go back safely to his home.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The cruel and wicked Kaṃsa returned the child and said :-- “Let this child go back safely to his home.”

[Ch 21 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King Karisa said thus, Vasudeva, the son of Śūrasena gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King Karisa told his ministers: that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth son would be the cause of his death; and so there was no necessity to kill that child. There was no need to incur sin by killing the first child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the king Kaṃsa said thus, Vāsudeva, the son of Śūrasena gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King Kaṃsa told his ministers that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth son would he the cause of his death; and so there was no necessity to kill that child. There was no need to iñcur sin by killing the first child.

[Ch 21 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ministers, hearing the king Kamsa's those words, began to praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly "Well done" "Well done." They went away to their respective ho.nes, when ordered to do so by Kanisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ministers, hearing the king Kaṃsa’s those words, began to praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly “Well done” “Well done.” They went away to their respective homes, when ordered to do so by Kaṃsa.

[Ch 21 Verse 46-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now Nārada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kaṇīsa. The king Kaṇīsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him water to wash his mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped him dejectively and enquired of his wife—He then asked the Muni about the cause of his untimely arrival there. The Maharṣi Nārada then smilingly and with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kaṇisa,” “Kaṇisa” and then said, O blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru Mountain. There Brahmā and other gods formed an assembly and were thus thinking out plans that Viṣṇu, the Supreme God, would take His birth in the womb of Devakī, the wife of Vasudeva to kill Kaṇisa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now Nārada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kaṃsa. The king Kaṃsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him water to wash his mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped him devotedly and enquired of his welfare. He then asked the Muni about the cause of his untimely arrival there. The Maharṣi Nārada then smilingly and with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kaṃsa,” “Kaṃsa” and then said, O blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru Mountain. There Brahmā and other gods formed an assembly and were thus thinking out plans that Viṣṇu, the Supreme God, would take His birth in the womb of Devakī, the wife of Vāsudeva to kill Kaṃsa.

[Ch 21 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have you not killed the son of Vasudeva?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have you not killed the son of Vāsudeva?

[Ch 21 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Karīsa said: "I will kill the eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice".
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kaṃsa said :-- “I will kill the eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice.”

[Ch 21 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O King! Now I understand that you do not understand any thing of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious results; especially when you are quite ignorant of the Māyā of the Devas, then what shall I say to you!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O King! Now I understand that you do not understand anything of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious results; especially when you are quite ignorant of the Māyā of the Devas, then what shall I say to you!

[Ch 21 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The truth is this: the warriors, looking after their own welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered: “the eighth son.” It means the children counted from the first and then finished upto eighth; it may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego your enemies: then why have you desisted in killing your enemy when you got that enemy in your possession. Nothing is shewn of you in this act save dire foolishness, and ignorance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The truth is this :-- The warriors, looking after their own welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered “the eighth son.” It means the children counted from the first and then finished upto eighth; it may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego your enemies; then why have you desisted in killing your enemy when you got that enemy in your possession. Nothing is shewn of you in this act save dire foolishness, and ignorance.

[Ch 21 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Maharṣī Nārada vanished quickly. Kaṃsa, of little understanding brought back the son of Vasudeva and killed him by dashing him against a stone and was relieved. Note: This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the macrocosm. God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this human body also live the Devas and the Danavas. The left half of the body, the Idā side, is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the Pingālā side, is the seat of the Dānavas. In this body war is always going on between the Devas and Dānavas. Sometimes the Devas get victory; sometimes the Dānavas win. God is in the centre, the heart and controls the two. Here ends the Twenty first Chapter of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyāsa, on the killing of the sons of Devakī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Maharṣi Nārada vanished quickly. Kaṃsa, of little understanding brought back the son of Vāsudeva and killed him by dashing him against a stone and was relieved. Note :-- This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the macrocosm. God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this human body also live the Devas and the Dānavas. The left half of the body, the Īdā side, is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the Piṅgalā side, is the seat of the Dānavas. In this body war is always going on between the Devas and Dānavas. Sometimes the Devas get victory; sometimes the Dānavas win. God is in the centre, the heart and controls the two. Here ends the 21st Chapter of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyāsa, on the killing of the sons of Devakī.
