CHAPTER XXIX

On the Stealing of Sitā

व्यास उवाच

तदाक्षर्यं वचो दुर्घं जानकी भयविद्धुला ।

वेयमाना स्थितं कृत्वा मनो वाचमुवाच ह ॥1॥

पौलस्य विमसूताक्यं त्वमात्य स्यमापोहितः ।

नाहं वै स्थैरिणी किन्तु जनकस्य कुलोजूद्वा ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: Hearing these vicious words, Jānakī

Book III Chapter XXIX

became very much confounded with began to tremble; somehow collecting herself she began to say: "O descendant of the family of Pulastya! Why are you, prompted by lust, uttering these sinful words? I am born of the family of Janaka; therefore I cannot act wantonly according to my own inclination.

भाछ्छ लढ़ी द्वारास्ता त्वं राम त्वं वे द्विध्यति ।

मत्कृते मरणं तत्र भविष्यित न संग्रयः ॥ ३ ॥

O ten faced one! Better you go to Lanka quickly; else Rāmacandra will take away your life; you will no doubt incur death for my sake."

इत्युक्चना पश्णालायां गता सा बहिंग्रिधी ।

गच्छ गच्छिति वद्ती राजणं लोकारावणम् ॥ 4 ॥

सोउध कृष्णा निजी रूपं जगामोटजामान्तकम् ।

बलाजजग्राह तां बालां रूदतां भयविह्वालम् ॥ 5 ॥

Thus saying, Sitā Devi went towards the Sacred fire called Gārhapyata, placed in the house, with words “go away” “go away” in her mouth. He, whose wickedness has caused all the Lokas cry out “save” “save”, the same Rāvaṇa, of perverted intellect, then assumed his real form went towards the hut and caught hold of Sitā Devi who was crying, bewildered with fear.

तयारमिति क्रंदती लक्ष्मणेति मुडुपुंडुः ।

गृहीता निरनं: पापो रथमारोप्य सत्यरः ॥ 6 ॥

Sitā cried “Rāma” “Rāma” “Laksmaṇa”, and the sinful Rāvaṇa caught hold of her and quickly mounting her on the chariot, fast got away.

गच्छकरभुपगुज मार्ग कढ़ो जटायुषा ।

संग्रामो5भूमहागैद्रस्तयोस्तत्र वनान्तरे ॥ 7 ॥

हूला तं तां गृहीत्वा च गतोजसी राश्रमाधिपः ।

लंकायां कंदर्ती तात कुरीर्व सुरात्मनः ॥ 8 ॥

अंगोकवनिकायां सा स्थापिता राश्रसीयुता ।

स्वत्नात्रेव चलिता समावतादिधि: किल ॥ 9 ॥

On the way Jatāyu, the son of Aruna met Rāvana; and a terrible fight then ensued between the two, when the evil minded Rāvana, king of Demons, killed Jatāyu. Rāvana carried Sitā to Lankā. Then Sitā cried like a forlorn deer and

Rāvaṇa kept her in the Aśoka forest, (Jaffnā) surrounded and guarded by the Rāksasis. The king of Lankā tempted Sitā with comforting words, and the kingdoms etc., but she never swerved from her own pure and stainless chastity.

रामोर्पि तं मृगं हृता जगामादाय निर्वृत: ।

आयातं लक्ष्मण बीक्ष कि कृतं तैनउजासमम् ॥ 10 ॥

एकाकिर्मी प्रियां हित्वा किमर्थं त्वमिहाताः ।

श्रुला स्वनं तु गामस्य राघवस्त्वबीदिदम् ॥ 11 ॥

सौमित्रित्वबद्वीद्वाक्यं सीतावारावणपीर्ततः ।

प्रभोजगहं समायातः कालयोगात्र संवराः ॥ 12 ॥

On the other side, Rāmacandra after killing the deer and taking it was coming back calmly, when he saw Lakṣmaṇa going to him and said “O Lakṣmaṇa! What a great blunder you have committed! Hearing the voice of that villain conjurer, how is it that you have left my dear Sita alone and come here! Lakṣmaṇa said: “O Lord! Being pierced sharply by Sita Devi’s words (coming like sharpened arrows) and being driven away by her, under the guidance of the Inevitable Destiny as it were, I have come her; there is no doubt in this.”

तदा ती परिणालायां गला विश्वासितु: प्रिक्तो ।

जानक्य-देषणे यत्नपुभी कर्तुं समुदाती ॥ 13 ॥

They, then, both hurriedly went to their hut, made of leaves; and there not finding Sitā, they were very much afflicted with sorrows and went in quest of Jānakī.

मार्गमाणी तु सम्पानी यत्रासी पतितः खगः ।

जटायुः प्राणशेषसु पतितः पृथिवीतेले ॥ 14 ॥

Rāma and Laksmaṇa in their search for Sītā, came at last to the spot where Jatāyu, the king of birds, was lying on the surface of the earth, with his life ultimately on the point of parting away from his body.

तेनेोकं रावणेनाथ हृताउसौ जनकामजा ।

मया निर्भूदः पाणातया पातितोड़ं मृधे पुनः ॥ 15 ॥

इत्युक्स्ताउसी गतग्राण: संस्कृतो रावयेच वै ।

कृत्यौध्वंदैहिकं पागलक्ष्मणौ निर्फर्ती ततः ॥ 16 ॥

Śrimaddevithāgavatam

Jatāyu said: Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā, carried away today stealthily Sītā Devī; I resisted that villain who then fought with me on that account and threw me down on this spot by weapons. Thus saying, the king of birds died; whereupon Rāmacandra performed the burning of his dead body as well his funeral ceremonies. Then both of them went out of that place.

ककंधो धारायित्वारसी शगाणच्चामोचयद्रभुः ।

वचनातस्य हरीण सख्यं चक्रे३४ रायबः ॥ 17 ॥

Then the Lord Rāmacandra killed Kabandha and freed him from his curse; and, through his advice, he made friendship with Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, and was thus bound under a tie.

हत्वा च वालिन्दं वीरं किंक्किपाराज्युपनाम् ।

सुरीवाय ददी राम: कृतसखाय कार्वत: ॥ १ ८ ॥

Next Rāma killed the hero Bali as a duty and gave the excellent kingdom of Kīskindhyā to his new friend Sugrīva according to his promise.

तत्रैव वार्षिकान्मासांतस्थी लक्षणमंसुतः ।

चिंतयज्ञानकी चित्ते इशाननहतं चियाम ॥19॥

Then, he began to ceaselessly think of the stealing away of Sītā by Rāvana and passed away the four months of the rainy season there with his brother Lakṣmaṇa.

तक्ष्मणं प्रष्ट्र रामसृ सीताविरह्योषितः ।

रीमिये कैक्षयसुता जाता पूर्णमोनार्थ ॥ 20 ॥

Rāma, being very much shaken on account of the bereavement of Sītā, began to address Lakṣmana thus: “O Saumitre! The desires of the daughter of the king of Kekaya are now fulfilled.”

न प्राप्ता जानकी नूने नाई जीवामि तां विज्ञा ।

नागाधिष्याययोधायामुते जनकनन्दिनीम् ॥ २१ ॥

Jānakī will no more be obtained; without Jānaki I will not go back to Ayodhyā; without Jānaki I won't be able to live any longer."

गतं राज्यं बने वासो मृततातो हता प्रिया ।

पौद्रभ्यां स द्रुवाता द्वैवोउे किं करिष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

Kingdom lost, dwelling in forests happened, father left his body, at last the dear wife is lost; the

cruel hands of Destiny are tormenting me now thus; what more it will inflict, how can I say now?"

दुर्जेंयं घबित्वयं हिं प्राणिनां घरतानुज ।

आवयोः का गतितस्ता भविष्यति सुबुःखदा ॥ 23 ॥

O Brother Lakṣmana! What is to happen is very hard to be known beforehand by men; I cannot say what is written on my fate after this, painful or otherwise.

प्रायः जन्म मनोर्वेरी राजपुत्रावृषी कित।

चनेत्रितुःखणीकर्ता जातौ पूर्वकृतेन च ॥ 24 ॥

See! Both of us, the descendants of Manu, though born in a royal family, are exiled in forests due to our past deeds.

त्यक्ता त्वमपि योगांस्तु मया सह विवर्गितः ।

दैवयोगार्च सीधिये पुध्व दुःखं दुर्वत्यम् ॥ 25 ॥

O Lakshmana! It is Fate, too, that you, abandoning the pleasures of the royal surroundings, have come out with me; and you, too, are now suffering heaps of dire troubles with me.

न कोय्यस्तुले पूर्व मसमो दुःखभाड़नः ।

अर्किचनोक्ष्म लित्तो न पृतो न पविष्यति ॥ 26 ॥

No one in our family suffered so much as we are suffering; why we talk of our family! No human being was ever born or will ever take his birth that suffered or will like me so many troubles, will be like me incapacitated and a penniless pauper.

कि कंसोम्ब शीमिये मनोरंमि दुःखसागरे ।

न चास्ति तरणोपायो हासहायस्य मे किल ॥ 27 ॥

O Saumite! I am drowned in the ocean of pain and troubles; What am I to do now? I have no means to cross this ocean; I am quite helpless, no doubt.

न वित्त न वर्त वीर त्यमेकः सहचारकः ।

कोपं कसिन्करोगध्य भोगेसिन्यकृतोउनुज ॥ 28 ॥

No money, nor armies, O hero! you are my one and only one companion; O brother! On whom shall I be angry when I am suffering on account of my own deeds?

गतं हस्तगतं राज्यं क्षणादिद्रासनोयम् ।

वने वासस्तु संप्राप्तः को वेद विध्विनिर्मितम् ॥ 29 ॥

Book III Chapter XXIX

Alas! The kingdom that could have been compared in prosperity to the Indra Sabha, was almost obtained by me when, in an instant, I lost it and am now in exile in forest. Laksmaṇa! Who can ascertain what is in the womb of Destiny?

बालभावाच्छ्व वैदेही चलिता चावयोः सह ।

नीता दैवेन दुढेन रणमा दुःखतर्गो दणा ॥ 30 ॥

Oh! That soft bodied Sitā, with her child like nature came out with is in this forest; but the inexorable Fate has now drowned her, that perfectly beautiful woman, into an ocean of sorrows, difficult to be crossed?

लंकेशस्य गृहे रणमा कर्थ दुःखं पशिव्यति ।

पतितान सुर्गीता च मयि प्रीतितुगा भृणम् ॥ ३ १ ॥

That fair daughter of Janaka is extremely devoted to me; she is pure and holy. How will she be able to suffer troubles in the house of the king of Lanka!

न च लक्ष्मण वैदेही सा तस्य वर्गगा भवेत् ।

स्वीरिणीव रात्रोहा कर्थ स्याजनकात्मजा ॥ 32 ॥

O Laksmana! Sitā Devi will never come under the control of Rāvana; how can that excellent chaste woman act like an ordinary public woman?

त्वजेन्वागाधिर्यन्ते वैधिती भरतानुज ।

न रावणस्य वरणा भयंदिति सुनिश्छान् ॥ 33 ॥

O Laksmana! Rest assured that in case Rāvana exercises, out of his lordly position, any violence on Sitā, she will rather put an end to her life than come under his control.

भृता चेजजनकी वीर प्राणांल्यक्षायामसंशयम् ।

भृता चेदिसतावगी कि मे देहेत लक्ष्मण ॥ 34 ॥

O Laksāma! And when Jānaki sacrifices her life, I will assuredly do the same; for, of what use, then is this body to me when that fair Sitā has gone away with her life?"

एवं विलप्यानं तं रामः कमललोचनम् ।

लक्ष्मण: ग्रष्ट धर्मात्मा सांत्यवन्त्रया गिरा ।। 35 ॥

While the lotus-eyed Rāmacandra was thus weeping and expressing his regrets and arrows, the religious Lakṣmaṇa consoled him with the following sweet, truthful, words:

धियं कुर्भ महावाही त्यक्त्या काततातिमहं ।

आनविष्यामि वैदेही हत्या तं राक्षसाधामम् ॥ 36 ॥

O Hero of heroes! Kindly cast aside this weakness and have patience; I will soon kill that villain demon Rāvana and get you back your Sītā Devi"

आपदि सम्पदि तुल्या धीर्वाद्वान्ति ते धीरा ।

अत्यधियन्तु निम्नानः कहे भवन्ति विषवेधि ॥ 37 ॥

The wise steady persons remain on account of their fortitude, unshaken in their hearts whether in joy or in sorrow; whereas men, of little intellect, indulge in sorrows when they are happy.

संयोगो विग्रयोगश्र दैवाधीनावृषावि ।

गोकस्तु कीर्णास्त्र देशेनान्यिन च कवित्न् ॥ 38 ॥

Coming in union and going out in disunion, both are under the hands of Destiny; What, then, there is the need for expressing sorrows for this body, which is not soul.

राज्याद्धा वने वसामो वेदेहा हरणं यथा ।

तथा काले समीचीने संयोगोर्पि भविष्यति ॥ 39 ॥

As we have been banished from our kingdom into this forest, as there has happened this bereavement of Sītā, so, in proper time we will again get back Sītā Devi.

प्राप्तव्यं सुखदुःखानां भोगार्वित्रं नव्यित् ।

नान्यथा जानकीजाने तस्माछेकं रक्षाज्ञानु ॥ 40 ॥

O Darling of Jānakī! There must come a time when sorrows will be converted into happiness and vice; there will be nothing otherwise. So avoid this sorrow now and have firmness.

वानगः सन्ति मुचांगो गाथिच्छिति चतुर्विण ।

शूढ़ि जनकानन्दिन्य आनयिविन्त ते किल ॥ 41 ॥

There are multitudes of monkeys, who are our helping hand; they will go to all the four quarters and bring back to us the news of the daughter of Janaka; there is no doubt in this.

ज्ञाला मार्गस्थिति तत्र गत्वा कृत्वा पराक्रमम् ।

हत्वा तं पापकर्मिणानयिधायिमे भिविलीम् ॥ 42 ॥

O Lord! Knowing the way to Lankā, we will go there and kill by our prowess the villainous Rāvaṇa and bring back Sitā Devi.

सनैम्यं भर्तं वारूपि समायुव सहानुजम् ।

हन्थिमायो वयं श्रई किं शोचरिस सुधाग्रज ॥ 4 3 ॥

Or we will call Bharata with Sátrughna and will all the armies we all united will kill our enemy; why, then, are you thus expressing sorrows in vain.

त्युगीकरचेनेव जिता: सर्वा दिशः पुरा ।

तद्वीजनः कर्थ शोकै कर्तमूर्तिस रायच ॥ 44 ॥

O Lord! our ancestor Raghu, the hero of heroes, the monarch won his victories over the ten quarters; and you belong to that family and are now plunged in grief!

एकोईं सक्लताझ्रेतुं समवर्गस्मि सुरासुरान् ।

किं पुनः ससहायो वै रावणं कुलपांतनम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Alone, I can defeat all the Devas and the Demons; and if I get help, is there any doubt, then, in my killing that Rāvaṇa, the disgrace of the family of Rāksasas.

जनक वा समानीय साहाय्ये सुनन्दन ।

हनिष्यामि दुराचारं राजर्षं सुरुकपटकम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

O Powerful One! We may call to our aid the king of Janaka and root out that wicked source of enemy to the Devas.

सुख्यसानन्तं यस्य सुखुखःखस्मूद्वे ।

स शोकसागरे मनो न सुखी स्यात्कदाचन ॥ 4 7 ॥

मनोउतिताकारं यस्य सुखुखःख स्मूद्वे ।

स शोकसागरे मनो न सुखी स्यात्कदाचन ॥ 4 8 ॥

“O Descendant of Raghu! Like the rim of a wheel, happiness and pain come alternately; it is not that happiness, or pain comes and remains for ever. He whose mind is very much overwhelmed with pain or happiness, is the man who is always plunged in an ocean of misery; and he can never expect to become happy.”

इन्ट्रेण व्यसनं प्राप्त पुरा वै स्युनन्दन ।

नहुषः स्थायिति देखे: सर्वैर्मयन्तः पदे ॥ 49 ॥

See! In days of yore, Indra once got addicted into vicious habits; The Devas united put in place of Indra, the king Nahuṣa.

स्थितः पडूजमध्ये च बहुवर्षगणानपि ।

अज्ञातावां मघवा भीतस्यत्वता निजं पदम् ॥ 50 ॥

Then Indra, terrified, relinquished his post and passed very many years into an unknown and noticed state within lotus.

पुनः प्राप्त निजस्यानं काले विषरित्रिते ।

नहुष: परितो भूमौ शापाद्वजाराकृति: ॥ 51 ॥

Again, when time changed, he got his own post back; and the king Nahuṣa fell down on this earth and became transformed into a boa constrictor, (a big serpent) through the curse of a Rṣi.

इन्द्राणीं कामयानस्तु बाह्याणनवमन्य च ।

अगस्तिकोपासंजात: सपद्रेहो महीपति: ॥ 52 ॥

The king Nahuṣa wanted the wife of Indra and insulted a Brāhmin; therefore, he was under the curse of Maharṣi Agasti, transformed into a snake on the earth.

तस्माधोको न कर्तवो व्यसने सति राघव ।

उद्यो चित्तमास्थाय स्थात्यं वे चित्थैक्षता ॥ 53 ॥

Therefore, O Rāghava! One ought not to plunge in grief, when a danger comes; rather one should be quite energetic in times of danger and remain firm; thus, the sages do.

सर्वत्रोसि महाभाग समर्पोसि जगायते ।

कि प्राकृत इतावर्थ कुनेर शोकामतानि ॥ 54 ॥

O Lord of the world! You are high minded, omniscient and omnipotent; why are you now overwhelmed with grief, like an ordinary mortal.

व्यास उवाच

इति लक्ष्मणावक्येन बोधितो रघुनन्दन: ।

त्यक्त्वा शोकं त्वारभवं घषूव विगतअर: ॥ 55 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ये

एकोनिरिशोअवाग: 11 29 ॥

Vyāsa said: Oh king! Thus consoled by Lakṣmana, Rāma discarded all his heavy sorrows and began to remain with his heart firm and at rest.

Thus ends the Twenty ninth Chapter on the stealing of Sītā and the sorrows of Rāma in the

Third Book of Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam

of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi

Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXX

