[Ch 29 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Hearing these vicious words, Jānakī became very much confounded with began to tremble; somehow collecting herself she began to say: "O descendant of the family of Pulastya! Why are you, prompted by lust, uttering these sinful words? I am born of the family of Janaka; therefore I cannot act wantonly according to my own inclination.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Hearing these vicious words, Jānakī became very much confounded with fear and began to tremble; somehow collecting herself she began to say :-- “O descendant of the family of Pulastya! Why are you, prompted by lust, uttering these sinful words? I am born of the family of Janaka; therefore I cannot act wantonly according to my own inclination.

[Ch 29 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O ten faced one! Better you go to Lanka quickly; else Rāmacandra will take away your life; you will no doubt incur death for my sake."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O ten faced one! Better you go to Laṅkā quickly; else Rāmcandra will take away your life; you will no doubt iñcur death for my sake.”

[Ch 29 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Sitā Devi went towards the Sacred fire called Gārhapyata, placed in the house, with words “go away” “go away” in her mouth. He, whose wickedness has caused all the Lokas cry out “save” “save”, the same Rāvaṇa, of perverted intellect, then assumed his real form went towards the hut and caught hold of Sitā Devi who was crying, bewildered with fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Sītā Devī went towards the Sacred fire called Gārhapatya, placed in the house, with words “go away” “go away” in her mouth. He, whose wickedness has caused all the Lokas cry out “save” “save”, the same Rāvaṇa, of perverted intellect, then assumed his real form, went towards the hut and caught hold of Sītā Devī who was crying, bewildered with fear.

[Ch 29 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sitā cried “Rāma” “Rāma” “Laksmaṇa”, and the sinful Rāvaṇa caught hold of her and quickly mounting her on the chariot, fast got away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sītā cried “Rāma” “Rāma” “Lakṣmaṇa”, and the sinful Rāvaṇa caught hold of her and quickly mounting her on the chariot, fast got away.

[Ch 29 Verse 7-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the way Jatāyu, the son of Aruna met Rāvana; and a terrible fight then ensued between the two, when the evil minded Rāvana, king of Demons, killed Jatāyu. Rāvana carried Sitā to Lankā. Then Sitā cried like a forlorn deer and Rāvaṇa kept her in the Aśoka forest, (Jaffnā) surrounded and guarded by the Rāksasis. The king of Lankā tempted Sitā with comforting words, and the kingdoms etc., but she never swerved from her own pure and stainless chastity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the way Jatāyu, the son of Aruṇa, met Rāvaṇa; and a terrible fight then ensued between the two, when the evil minded Rāvaṇa, the king of the Demons, killed Jatāyu. Rāvaṇa carried Sītā to Laṅkā. Then Sītā cried like a forlorn deer and Rāvaṇa kept her in the Aśoka forest (Jaffna), surrounded and guarded by the Rākṣasis. The king of Laṅkā tempted Sītā with comforting words, and the kingdoms, etc., but she never swerved from her own pure and stainless chastity.

[Ch 29 Verse 10-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other side, Rāmacandra after killing the deer and taking it was coming back calmly, when he saw Lakṣmaṇa going to him and said “O Lakṣmaṇa! What a great blunder you have committed! Hearing the voice of that villain conjurer, how is it that you have left my dear Sita alone and come here! Lakṣmaṇa said: “O Lord! Being pierced sharply by Sita Devi’s words (coming like sharpened arrows) and being driven away by her, under the guidance of the Inevitable Destiny as it were, I have come her; there is no doubt in this.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other side, Rāmacandra after killing the deer and taking it was coming back calmly, when he saw Lakṣmaṇa going to him and said “O Lakṣmaṇa! What a great blunder you have committed! Hearing the voice of that villain conjurer, how is it that you have left my dear Sītā alone and come here!” Lakṣmaṇa said :-- “O Lord! Being pierced sharply by Sītā Devī’s words (coming like sharpened arrows) and being driven away by her, under the guidance of the Inevitable Destiny as it were, I have come here; there is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 29 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They, then, both hurriedly went to their hut, made of leaves; and there not finding Sitā, they were very much afflicted with sorrows and went in quest of Jānakī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They, then, both hurriedly went to their hut, made of leaves; and there not finding Sītā, they were very much afflicted with sorrows and went in quest of Jānakī.

[Ch 29 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāma and Laksmaṇa in their search for Sītā, came at last to the spot where Jatāyu, the king of birds, was lying on the surface of the earth, with his life ultimately on the point of parting away from his body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa in their search for Sītā, came at last to the spot where Jatāyu, the king of birds, was lying on the surface of the earth, with his life ultimately on the point of parting away from his body.

[Ch 29 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrimaddevithāgavatam Jatāyu said: Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā, carried away today stealthily Sītā Devī; I resisted that villain who then fought with me on that account and threw me down on this spot by weapons. Thus saying, the king of birds died; whereupon Rāmacandra performed the burning of his dead body as well his funeral ceremonies. Then both of them went out of that place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jatāyu said :-- Rāvaṇa, the king of Laṅkā, carried away today stealthily Sītā Devī; I resisted that villain who then fought with me on that account and threw me down on this spot by weapons. Thus saying, the king of birds died; whereupon Rāmcandra performed the burning of his dead body as well his funeral ceremonies. Then both of them went out of that place.

[Ch 29 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Lord Rāmacandra killed Kabandha and freed him from his curse; and, through his advice, he made friendship with Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, and was thus bound under a tie.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Lord Rāmacandra killed Kabandha and freed him from his curse; and, through his advice, he made friendship with Sugrīva, the king of the monkeys, and was thus bound under a tie.

[Ch 29 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next Rāma killed the hero Bali as a duty and gave the excellent kingdom of Kīskindhyā to his new friend Sugrīva according to his promise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next Rāma killed the hero Balī as a duty and gave the excellent kingdom of Kiṣkindhyā to his new friend Sugrīva according to his promise.

[Ch 29 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, he began to ceaselessly think of the stealing away of Sītā by Rāvana and passed away the four months of the rainy season there with his brother Lakṣmaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, he began to ceaselessly think of the stealing away of Sītā by Rāvaṇa and passed away the four months of the rainy season there with his brother Lakṣmaṇa.

[Ch 29 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rāma, being very much shaken on account of the bereavement of Sītā, began to address Lakṣmana thus: “O Saumitre! The desires of the daughter of the king of Kekaya are now fulfilled.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rāma, being very much shaken on account of the bereavement of Sītā, began to address Lakṣmaṇa thus :-- “O Saumitre! The desires of the daughter of the king of Kekaya are now fulfilled.

[Ch 29 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Jānakī will no more be obtained; without Jānaki I will not go back to Ayodhyā; without Jānaki I won't be able to live any longer."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Jānakī will no more be obtained; without Jānakī I will not go back to Ayodhyā; without Jānakī I won’t be able to live any longer.

[Ch 29 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kingdom lost, dwelling in forests happened, father left his body, at last the dear wife is lost; the cruel hands of Destiny are tormenting me now thus; what more it will inflict, how can I say now?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kingdom lost, dwelling in forests happened, father left his body, at last the dear wife is lost; the cruel hands of Destiny are tormenting me now thus; what more it will inflict, how can I say now?

[Ch 29 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brother Lakṣmana! What is to happen is very hard to be known beforehand by men; I cannot say what is written on my fate after this, painful or otherwise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brother Lakṣmaṇa! What is to happen is very hard to be known beforehand by men; I cannot say, what is written on my fate after this, painful or otherwise.

[Ch 29 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! Both of us, the descendants of Manu, though born in a royal family, are exiled in forests due to our past deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! Both of us, the descendants of Manu, though born in a royal family, are exiled in forests due to our past deeds.

[Ch 29 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lakshmana! It is Fate, too, that you, abandoning the pleasures of the royal surroundings, have come out with me; and you, too, are now suffering heaps of dire troubles with me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lakṣmaṇa! It is by Fate, too, that you, abandoning the pleasures of the royal surroundings, have come out with me; and you, too, are now suffering heaps of dire troubles with me.

[Ch 29 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one in our family suffered so much as we are suffering; why we talk of our family! No human being was ever born or will ever take his birth that suffered or will like me so many troubles, will be like me incapacitated and a penniless pauper.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No one in our family suffered so much as we are suffering; why we talk of our family! No human being was ever born or will ever take his birth that suffered or will suffer like me so many troubles, will be like me incapacitated and a penniless pauper.

[Ch 29 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Saumite! I am drowned in the ocean of pain and troubles; What am I to do now? I have no means to cross this ocean; I am quite helpless, no doubt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Saumitre! I am drowned in the ocean of pains and troubles; What am I to do now? I have no means to cross this ocean; I am quite helpless, no doubt.

[Ch 29 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No money, nor armies, O hero! you are my one and only one companion; O brother! On whom shall I be angry when I am suffering on account of my own deeds?
NEW CORR ENG ──► No money, nor armies, O hero! you are my one and only one companion; O brother! On whom shall I be angry when I am suffering on account of my own deeds?

[Ch 29 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! The kingdom that could have been compared in prosperity to the Indra Sabha, was almost obtained by me when, in an instant, I lost it and am now in exile in forest. Laksmaṇa! Who can ascertain what is in the womb of Destiny?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! The kingdom that could have been compared in prosperity to the Indra Sabha, was almost obtained by me when, in an instant, I lost it and am now in exile in forest. Lakṣmaṇ! Who can ascertain what is in the womb of Destiny?

[Ch 29 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! That soft bodied Sitā, with her child like nature came out with is in this forest; but the inexorable Fate has now drowned her, that perfectly beautiful woman, into an ocean of sorrows, difficult to be crossed?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! That soft bodied Sītā, with her child like nature came out with us in this forest; but the inexorable Fate has now drowned her, that perfectly beautiful woman, into an ocean of sorrows, difficult to be crossed?

[Ch 29 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That fair daughter of Janaka is extremely devoted to me; she is pure and holy. How will she be able to suffer troubles in the house of the king of Lanka!
NEW CORR ENG ──► That fair daughter of Janaka is extremely devoted to me; she is pure and holy. How will she be able to suffer troubles in the house of the king of Laṅkā!

[Ch 29 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Laksmana! Sitā Devi will never come under the control of Rāvana; how can that excellent chaste woman act like an ordinary public woman?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lakṣmaṇa! Sītā Devī will never come under the control of Rāvaṇa; how can that excellent chaste woman act like an ordinary public woman?

[Ch 29 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Laksmana! Rest assured that in case Rāvana exercises, out of his lordly position, any violence on Sitā, she will rather put an end to her life than come under his control.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lakṣmaṇa! Rest assured that in case Rāvaṇa exercises, out of his lordly position, any violence on Sītā, she will rather put an end to her life than come under his control.

[Ch 29 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Laksāma! And when Jānaki sacrifices her life, I will assuredly do the same; for, of what use, then is this body to me when that fair Sitā has gone away with her life?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lakṣmaṇa! And when Jānakī sacrifices her life, I will assuredly do the same; for, of what use, then is this body to me when that fair Sītā has gone away with her life?”

[Ch 29 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the lotus-eyed Rāmacandra was thus weeping and expressing his regrets and arrows, the religious Lakṣmaṇa consoled him with the following sweet, truthful, words:
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the lotus eyed Rāmcandra was thus weeping and expressing his regrets and sorrows, the religious Lakṣmaṇa consoled him with the following sweet, truthful, words :--

[Ch 29 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Hero of heroes! Kindly cast aside this weakness and have patience; I will soon kill that villain demon Rāvana and get you back your Sītā Devi"
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Hero of the heroes! Kindly cast aside this weakness and have patience; I will soon kill that villain demon Rāvaṇa and get you back your Sītā Devī.

[Ch 29 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise steady persons remain on account of their fortitude, unshaken in their hearts whether in joy or in sorrow; whereas men, of little intellect, indulge in sorrows when they are happy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise steady persons remain on account of their fortitude, unshaken in their hearts whether in joy or in sorrow; whereas men, of little intellect, indulge in sorrows when they are happy.

[Ch 29 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Coming in union and going out in disunion, both are under the hands of Destiny; What, then, there is the need for expressing sorrows for this body, which is not soul.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Coming in union and going out in disunion, both are under the hands of Destiny; What, then, there is the need for expressing sorrows for this body, which is not soul.

[Ch 29 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As we have been banished from our kingdom into this forest, as there has happened this bereavement of Sītā, so, in proper time we will again get back Sītā Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As we have been banished from our kingdom into this forest, as there has happened this bereavement of Sītā, so, in proper time, we will again get back Sītā Devī.

[Ch 29 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Darling of Jānakī! There must come a time when sorrows will be converted into happiness and vice; there will be nothing otherwise. So avoid this sorrow now and have firmness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Darling of Jānakī! There must come a time when sorrows will be converted into happiness and vice versa; there will be nothing otherwise. So avoid this sorrow now and have firmness.

[Ch 29 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There are multitudes of monkeys, who are our helping hand; they will go to all the four quarters and bring back to us the news of the daughter of Janaka; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There are multitudes of monkeys, who are our helping hands; they will go to all the four quarters and bring back to us the news of the daughter of Janaka; there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 29 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! Knowing the way to Lankā, we will go there and kill by our prowess the villainous Rāvaṇa and bring back Sitā Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! Knowing the way to Laṅkā, we will go there and kill by our prowess the villainous Rāvaṇa and bring back Sītā Devī.

[Ch 29 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Or we will call Bharata with Sátrughna and will all the armies we all united will kill our enemy; why, then, are you thus expressing sorrows in vain.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Or we will call Bharata with Satrughṇa and with all the armies we all united will kill our enemy; why, then, are you thus expressing sorrows in vain.

[Ch 29 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! our ancestor Raghu, the hero of heroes, the monarch won his victories over the ten quarters; and you belong to that family and are now plunged in grief!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! our ancestor Raghu, the hero of heroes, the monarch; won his victories over the ten quarters; and you belong to that family and are now plunged in grief!

[Ch 29 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alone, I can defeat all the Devas and the Demons; and if I get help, is there any doubt, then, in my killing that Rāvaṇa, the disgrace of the family of Rāksasas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alone, I can defeat all the Devas and the Demons; and if I get help, is there any doubt, then, in my killing, that Rāvaṇa, the disgrace of the family of Rākṣasas.

[Ch 29 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Powerful One! We may call to our aid the king of Janaka and root out that wicked source of enemy to the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Powerful One! We may call to, our aid the king of Janaka and root out that wicked source of enemy to the Devas.

[Ch 29 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Descendant of Raghu! Like the rim of a wheel, happiness and pain come alternately; it is not that happiness, or pain comes and remains for ever. He whose mind is very much overwhelmed with pain or happiness, is the man who is always plunged in an ocean of misery; and he can never expect to become happy.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Descendant of Raghu! Like the rim of a wheel, happiness and pain come alternately; it is not that happiness, or pain comes and remains for ever. He whose mind is very much overwhelmed. with pain or happiness, is the man who is always plunged in an ocean of misery; and he can never expect to become happy.

[Ch 29 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See! In days of yore, Indra once got addicted into vicious habits; The Devas united put in place of Indra, the king Nahuṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► See! In days of yore, Indra once got addicted into vicious habits. The Devas united put in place of Indra, the king Nahuṣa.

[Ch 29 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Indra, terrified, relinquished his post and passed very many years into an unknown and noticed state within lotus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Indra, terrified, relinquished his post and passed very many years into an unknown and unnoticed state within the lotus.

[Ch 29 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again, when time changed, he got his own post back; and the king Nahuṣa fell down on this earth and became transformed into a boa constrictor, (a big serpent) through the curse of a Rṣi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again, when time changed, he got his own post back; and the king Nahuṣa fell down on this earth and became transformed into a boa constrictor (a big serpent), through the curse of a Ṛṣi.

[Ch 29 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king Nahuṣa wanted the wife of Indra and insulted a Brāhmin; therefore, he was under the curse of Maharṣi Agasti, transformed into a snake on the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king Nahuṣa wanted the wife of Indra and insulted a Brāhmin; therefore, he was, under the curse of Maharṣi Agasti, transformed into a snake on the earth.

[Ch 29 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Rāghava! One ought not to plunge in grief, when a danger comes; rather one should be quite energetic in times of danger and remain firm; thus, the sages do.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Rāghava! One ought not to plunge in grief, when a danger comes; rather one should be quite energetic in times of danger and remain firm; thus, the sages do.

[Ch 29 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! You are high minded, omniscient and omnipotent; why are you now overwhelmed with grief, like an ordinary mortal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the world! You are high minded, omniscient and omnipotent; why are you now overwhelmed with grief, like an ordinary mortal.”

[Ch 29 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Oh king! Thus consoled by Lakṣmana, Rāma discarded all his heavy sorrows and began to remain with his heart firm and at rest. Thus ends the Twenty ninth Chapter on the stealing of Sītā and the sorrows of Rāma in the Third Book of Śrimaddevirbhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Oh king! Thus consoled by Lakṣmaṇa, Rāma discarded all his heavy sorrows and began to remain with his heart firm and at rest. Thus ends the 29th chapter on the stealing of Sītā and the sorrows of Rāma in the 3rd Skandha of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
