CHAPTER VI

On the Preparation for War by Madhu Kaṭṭabha

སྐབས་ཆུང་

सोम्य यच्च तव्या प्रोक्ते शोरैयूंद महापाँवे ।

मधुकैदभयो: साद्ध पत्रुवर्षसहस्कम् ॥ १ ॥

The Rsi said: “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of the fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavān Śauri and Madhu Kaitabha.

कस्माती दानवौ जातौ तस्म्येकाणवै जले ।

महावीर्वी दुराधर्षों देर्वेरिप सुदुर्जरी ॥ 2 ॥

कयं तावसुरी जातौ कवं च हरिणा हतौ ।

तदाचक्रय महाप्रात्र चरितं परमाब्धुतम् ॥ 3 ॥

How was it that the two greatly powerful Dānavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why did Bhagavān Hari kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe that greatly wonderful event.

श्रोतुकामा वयं संर्वे त्वं तत्ता च बहुभुतः ।

दैवाच्यात्रैव सुझातः संयोगछा तथायवोः ॥ 4 ॥

We all are extremely eager to hear it, and you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our good luck that we have come across you here.

मूर्वीय सह संयोगो विषादपि सुडुर्जः ।

विज्ञेन सह संयोगः सुधाससमः स्मृतः ॥ ५ ॥

जीविति पगवः सर्वे खादिति मेईयन्ति च ।

जानन्ति विष्याकारं व्यावायसुखमढुतम् ॥ 6 ॥

As the contact with the illiterate is very painful, so the contact with the literate is very happy like nectar. The animals in this world live like illiterates; they eat, call for their nature, void urine and faeces, and know wonderfully well the sexual intercourse. न तेषां सदसऊर्जानं विवेको न च मोक्षदः ।

यगुषित से सभा जैया थेणां न अवगादतः ॥ 7 ॥

भगादा: पशव: केचिज्ञानंति आवणं सुखम् ।

अशोजाः फणिनश्रैव मुभुक्तनिद्धपात्नः ॥ 8 ॥

Only they want discriminative knowledge of

right and wrong, of the real and unreal, and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Mokṣa or final liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore, persons that have no liking to hear of Bhāgavata and books like it, are like beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the serpents, though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed quite like men, as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds.

पंचानार्मिदेशणां वै शुणे अश्वरादणें ।

श्वणादासुर्विज्ञानं दर्शनाधिचरतंजनम् ॥ 9 ॥

श्वर्ण विश्धिं प्रोक्र सान्तिकं राजतं तथा ।

तामसं च महाभागाः सुजोक्तं निश्रयान्ति ॥ 10 ॥

सात्चिकं वेदेशासादि साहित्यं चैव राजसम् ।

तामसं युद्धवातां च परदोषप्रकाशनम् ॥ 11 ॥

Verily out of the five organs of perception the organ of hearing and the organ of sight are benefiting, for the knowledge of things arises from hearing and the heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the Pundits divide in three classes, the objects of hearing, as: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik. The Vedas and other Śāstras are Sāttvik; the literature (śāthiya) is the Rājasik and war news and finding fault with others is Tāmasik.

सार्विक विविध प्रोक्त प्रज्ञाविद्वृष पणिकृतेः ।

उत्तम मध्यमं चैव तथैवाप्रमित्यत् ॥ 12 ॥

उत्तमं मोक्षकर्तवे स्वर्गदं मध्यमं तथा ।

अध्यं मोगदं प्रोक्ते निर्णय विहितं बृदी: ॥ 13 ॥

साहित्यं चैव जिविंयं स्वीयायां चोतमं स्मुतम् ।

मध्यमं वारयोषायां परोक्षायां त्वासधमम् ॥ 14 ॥

The wise persons again subdivide the Sāttvik in three sub-classes: good, middling and worst. That which gives Mokṣa is good or excellent; that which gives Heavens is middling and that which gives this worldly pleasure is worst. In the same way,

Book 1 Chapter VI

the literature (sāhitya) is of three kinds: That which describes the people to live with their legitimate wives is the best; which describes about prostitutes is the middling; and that which makes people live with other's wives is the worst.

तामर्स विविधं जैयं विद्धद्रिः: गास्बलर्शिभि: ।

अततात्यिन्युद्धे यततुतनमुदाहतम् ॥ 15 ॥

मध्यमं चापि विश्वेशातंडवानं तथात्रिभि: ।

अध्यं मेर्विनिमंतं तु विवादे कलहे तथा ॥ 16 ॥

The seers of śāstras, the learned men divide the subjects of the Tāmasik hearing into three classes: That in which fight with the enemies is described is best; where the fight, es of the Pāndavas, with the enemies out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; and that whore fighting is described without any cause is worst.

तदत्र ब्रवाणं मुख्यं पुराणस्य महान्ते ।

बुद्धिप्रवर्नं पूर्णं ततः पायपणारनम् ॥ 17 ॥

तदाख्याकि महावृष्टे कथां पोराणिकों शुभाम् ।

श्रुतां द्विपावनाम्बूर्व सर्वांधीय प्रसाधिनीम् ॥ 18 ॥

Therefore, O highly intelligent one! Hearing the Purānas is far superior to hearing other śāstras, for thereby sins are destroyecī, intellect is incased and Punyam (good merits) is stored. So, O intelligent one! Kindly describe to us, the Purānas, fulfilling all the requirements of life, that you heard before from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana". Hearing these words of the Rsi.

सूत उवाच

यूयं धन्या महाभागा धन्योड़ं पृथिवीत्ते ।

दोषां श्रवणबुद्धिद्ध प्रभि करणे किल ॥ 19 ॥

Suta said: “O, highly ‘ortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Purānas and I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the surface of the earth.

पूरा चैकाणंये जाते विलीने घुवनत्रये ।

गोषयकंसुले चे देवेरेने जानदेने ॥ 20 ॥

विष्णुकर्णमिलोद्धूतो दानवौ मधुकैटभौ ।

महाबाली च तो दैत्यी विवृद्धौ सागरे जले ॥ 21 ॥

क्रीडमानी स्थिती तत्र विश्रतातिवस्ततः ।

तावेकदा महाकावी क्रीडासन्तो महापाँले ॥ 22 ॥

In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya (universal dissolution) when the three lokas and the entire universe dissolved in water, when the Devadeva Janārdana was lying asleep in the bed of Ananta, the thousand-headed serpent, arose from the wax of the ear of Bhagavān Viṣu, the two very powerful Daityas Madhu and Kaṭābha; they grew in the waters of the ocean and played around in the waters and thus passed some of their time.

सितमावाप्तृशिते भातताविव संश्रिता ।

नाकारणं घबेल्कार्यं सर्वत्रैषा परम्परा ॥ 23 ॥

आधेयं तु विनाशारं न तिष्ठति कर्धंचन ।

आधाताधेघभावसृ भाति नो चित्नोगोचः ॥ 24 ॥

Once upon a time, when the two huge bodied Dānavas were playing with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general rule of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof.

क्व तिष्ठिति जलं चेदे सुखल्पं सुविस्तम।

केन सृष्टे कर्थे जातं मनावावाजुले स्थिति ॥ 25 ॥

आवां वा कथमुपत्रजी केन वोत्पादितावृषी ।

पित्तौ क्वेति विज्ञानं नास्ति कमां तथावयोः ॥ 26 ॥

But we cannot understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon rests this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created this? How was this created? Why are we living here merged within the water? Who created us? and who are our father and mother. Nothing of all these we know.

सूत उवाच

एवं कामयमानी तौ जामतूनं विविहायम् ।

उवाच कैटभस्तम मधुं पार्थे स्थितं जले ॥ 27 ॥

Thus thinking, when they could not come to any conclusion, Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him, within the waters:

कैटय जवाच

मधो वामत्र सलिले स्थानुं शक्तिम्हाल्वा ।

वर्तैे धातरचा कारणं सा हि हे मे मता ॥ 28 ॥

“O brother! It seems to me the great immovable force that makes us rest in this water is the cause of all.

त्या ततिभिदं तोयं तदाधारं च तिहिति ।

सा एव परया देवी कारणं च तबावयोः ॥ 29 ॥

This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by that force, rests on that; that Highest Devi must be the Cause of us."

एवं विबुध्यामानी तो चिंतालिष्टी यदासुरो ।

तदाकागे शुत तान्यां बारवीक्षं सुमनोहरम् । 30 ॥

When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they heard in the air the beautiful Vāgbīja (the seed mantra of Vāk, the speech, the Devi Sarasvati).

गृहीतं च तततायाम्य ततयाथ्यासो पूढ़: कृतः ।

तदा सौदामनी दूषा ताथ्यां तंघो चौधित्या भूभा ॥ 31 ॥

ताया विचारितं तत्र मोजेयं नासे शर्याः।

तबा ध्यानिर्दं रुई गाने सपुर्ण किन्त ॥ 32 ॥

निर्गहारी जितात्मानो तन्नत्की स्माहिति ।

वभूवर्त्यविर्धित्वंव जपध्यानपरायणी ॥ 33 ॥

They then began to pronounce repeatedly the Vākbija mantra and practised it with the great steadfastness. Next they saw, risen high up in the air, the auspicious lightning and thought that certainly our mantra that we are repeating has made Herself visible in this form of light and thus we have seen certainly in the air, the saguna form (form with attributes) of Sarasvatī, the goddess of Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, without any food, with their minds controlled, constantly thought of that, with their whole mind collected on that, and repeating and meditating the mantra became one with that.

एवं वर्षहच्छं तु तान्यां तनं महतप: ।

प्रसात्रा परमा शक्तिजाता सा परम तयोः ॥ 34 ॥

खिनी ती दानवी दृष्ट्या तपसे कृतनिश्छाये ।

तयोन्नुग्राहायि वागुवाचाशरीतिथि ॥ 35 ॥

वं वां वांछितं दैत्यो वृतं परमर्मतम् ।

ददामि परितुहा3स्मि युवोत्सपता किल ॥ 36 ॥

Thus they passed one thousand years in practising that great tapas; when the Highest Ādyā

Sakti became pleased with them and seeing the two dānavas, steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, addressed them, invisibly in the way of celestial voice thus: "O two Dānavas! I am exceedingly pleased with your tapasyā; so ask boon whatever you desire; I will grant it."

सूत जवाच

इति शुवा तु तां वाणी दानवा घतुस्तदा ।

स्वेच्छया मरणं देदि वरं नी देदि सुवते ॥ 37 ॥

Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus: the two Dānavas said: "O Devi! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die when we will."

वागुवाच

वांतिडत मरणं देदीय भवेढ़ा मनुसवात ।

अजेयी देवदैत्यक्ष प्रातारे नात्र संगशः ॥ 38 ॥

Hearing this, Vāgdevī said: “O two Dānavas! Certainly, by My grace, you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be invincible of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this.

सूत उवाच

इति दत्तवरी देया दानवी मदर्दर्षिति ।

चक्रतः सारगे क्रीडां यदोतरणामवित्ति ॥ 39 ॥

कालेन क्रियता विषा दानवाध्यां यदृष्छया ।

दृषः प्रजायतिर्ब्रीहा पशासनगतः प्रभुः ॥ 40 ॥

Sūta said: When the Devi granted them this boon, the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic animals in the ocean. O Brāhmins! Some days thus passed away when the two powerful Dānavas saw the Brahmā, the Prajāpati, seated on the lotus of the navel of Hari.

इद्यत तु मुदितावास्ता युद्धकामी महत्वली ।

तम्पतुस्तव तत्र युद्धे नी देहि सुतन ॥ 41 ॥

Doubt came on their minds and they told him with a view to fight: "O Suvrata! either fight with us, or leave off this lotus seat and go any where you like.

नोचेत्यं परित्यज्य ययेहं गछ माधिरम् ।

यदि त्व निर्वर्ताशास्त्र कव योग्ये शुभमासनम् ॥ 42 ॥

वीरभोग्यमिदं स्थानं कतारोसि स्थ जारुणं चै ।

तयोरिति वचः शुत्वा चित्तमाप प्रजापति: ॥ 43 ॥

Book 1 Chapter VII

दृष्टा च दालिनौ वीरो किं करोमीति तापस: ।

चिताधिस्तदा तस्थी चितव्यमनसा तदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागतै महापुराणे क्र.पण्यकन्ने भ्वो3.पश्रयः ॥ 6 1 ॥

If you be so weak, this auspicious lotus seat is not fit for you. For this should be enjoyed by the heroes. So if you be a coward, leave it quickly. Hearing these words of the Dānavas, Prajāpati,

engaged in the practise of Tapasyā, saw the two great powerful heroes and began to think anxiously 'What should be done now' and waited there."

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the First Book on the preparation for war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣī Veda Yyāsa.

Book I Chapter VII

