[Ch 6 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsi said: “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of the fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavān Śauri and Madhu Kaitabha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of the fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavān Śauri and Madhu Kaiṭabha.

[Ch 6 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How was it that the two greatly powerful Dānavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why did Bhagavān Hari kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe that greatly wonderful event.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How was it that the two greatly powerful Dānavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why did Bhagavān Hari kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe that greatly wonderful event.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We all are extremely eager to hear it, and you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our good luck that we have come across you here.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We all are extremely eager to hear it, and you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our good luck that we have come across you here.

[Ch 6 Verse 5-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Only they want discriminative knowledge of right and wrong, of the real and unreal, and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Mokṣa or final liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore, persons that have no liking to hear of Bhāgavata and books like it, are like beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the serpents, though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed quite like men, as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Only they want discriminative knowledge of right and wrong, of the real and unreal, and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Mokṣa or final liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore the persons that have no liking to hear of Bhāgavata and books like it, are like beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the serpents, though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed quite like men, as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds.

[Ch 6 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Verily out of the five organs of perception the organ of hearing and the organ of sight are benefiting, for the knowledge of things arises from hearing and the heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the Pundits divide in three classes, the objects of hearing, as: (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik. The Vedas and other Śāstras are Sāttvik; the literature (śāthiya) is the Rājasik and war news and finding fault with others is Tāmasik.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Verily out of the five organs of perception the organ of hearing and the organ of sight are benefitting, for the knowledge of things arises from hearing and the heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the Pundits divide in three classes, the objects of hearing, as :-- (1) Sāttvik, (2) Rājasik and (3) Tāmasik. The Vedas and other Śāstras are Sāttvik; the literature Sahitya is the Rājasik and war news and finding fault with others is Tāmasik.

[Ch 6 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The wise persons again subdivide the Sāttvik in three sub-classes: good, middling and worst. That which gives Mokṣa is good or excellent; that which gives Heavens is middling and that which gives this worldly pleasure is worst. In the same way, the literature (sāhitya) is of three kinds: That which describes the people to live with their legitimate wives is the best; which describes about prostitutes is the middling; and that which makes people live with other's wives is the worst.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The wise persons again sub-divide the Sāttvik in three sub-classes :-- good, middling and worst. That which gives Mokṣa is good or excellent; that which gives Heavens is middling and that which gives this worldly pleasure is worst. In the same way, the literature Sahitya is of three kinds :-- That which describes the people to live with their legitimate wives is the best; which describes about prostitutes is the middling; and that which makes people live with other’s wives is the worst.

[Ch 6 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The seers of śāstras, the learned men divide the subjects of the Tāmasik hearing into three classes: That in which fight with the enemies is described is best; where the fight, es of the Pāndavas, with the enemies out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; and that whore fighting is described without any cause is worst.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The seers of Sāstras, the learned men divide the subjects of the Tāmasik hearing into three classes :-- That in which fight with the enemies is described is best; where the fight, as of the Pandavas, with the enemies out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; and that where fighting is described without any cause is worst.

[Ch 6 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O highly intelligent one! Hearing the Purānas is far superior to hearing other śāstras, for thereby sins are destroyecī, intellect is incased and Punyam (good merits) is stored. So, O intelligent one! Kindly describe to us, the Purānas, fulfilling all the requirements of life, that you heard before from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana". Hearing these words of the Rsi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O highly intelligent one! Hearing the Purāṇas is far superior to hearing other Śāstras, for thereby sins are destroyed, intellect is increased and Puṇyam (good merits) is stored. So, O intelligent one! Kindly describe to us, the Purāṇas, fulfilling all the requirements of life, that you heard before from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana”. Hearing these words of the Ṛṣis,

[Ch 6 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Suta said: “O, highly ‘ortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Purānas and I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the surface of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- “O highly fortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Purāṇas and I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the surface of the earth”.

[Ch 6 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya (universal dissolution) when the three lokas and the entire universe dissolved in water, when the Devadeva Janārdana was lying asleep in the bed of Ananta, the thousand-headed serpent, arose from the wax of the ear of Bhagavān Viṣu, the two very powerful Daityas Madhu and Kaṭābha; they grew in the waters of the ocean and played around in the waters and thus passed some of their time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya (universal dissolution) when the three lokas and the entire universe dissolved in water, when the Devadeva Janārdana was lying asleep on the bed of Ananta, the thousand headed serpent, arose from the was of the ear of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the two very powerful Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha; they grew in the waters of the ocean and played around in the waters and thus passed some of their time.

[Ch 6 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once upon a time, when the two huge bodied Dānavas were playing with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general rule of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on a time, when the two huge bodied Dānavas were playing with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general rule of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof.

[Ch 6 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But we cannot understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon rests this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created this? How was this created? Why are we living here merged within the water? Who created us? and who are our father and mother. Nothing of all these we know.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But we cannot understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon rests this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created this? How was this created? Why are we living here merged within the water? Who created us? and who are our father and mother. Nothing of a these we know.

[Ch 6 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, when they could not come to any conclusion, Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him, within the waters:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, when they could not come to any conclusion, Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him, within the waters :--

[Ch 6 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O brother! It seems to me the great immovable force that makes us rest in this water is the cause of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Brother! It seems to me the great immoveable force that makes us rest in this water is the cause of all.

[Ch 6 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by that force, rests on that; that Highest Devi must be the Cause of us."
NEW CORR ENG ──► This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by that force, rests on that; that Highest Devī must be the Cause of us”.

[Ch 6 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they heard in the air the beautiful Vāgbīja (the seed mantra of Vāk, the speech, the Devi Sarasvati).
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they heard in the air the beautiful Vāgvīja (the seed mantra of Vāk, the speech, the Devī Sarasvatī).

[Ch 6 Verse 31-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then began to pronounce repeatedly the Vākbija mantra and practised it with the great steadfastness. Next they saw, risen high up in the air, the auspicious lightning and thought that certainly our mantra that we are repeating has made Herself visible in this form of light and thus we have seen certainly in the air, the saguna form (form with attributes) of Sarasvatī, the goddess of Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, without any food, with their minds controlled, constantly thought of that, with their whole mind collected on that, and repeating and meditating the mantra became one with that.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then began to pronounce repeated the Vāgvīja mantra and practised it with the great steadfastness. Next they saw, risen high up in the air, the auspicious lightning and thought that certainly our mantra that we are repeating has made Herself visible in this form of light and thus we have seen certainly in the air, the saguṇa form (form with attributes) of Sarasvatī, the goddess of Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, without any food, with their minds controlled, constantly thought of that, with their whole mind collected on that, and repeating and meditating the mantra became one with that.

[Ch 6 Verse 34-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus they passed one thousand years in practising that great tapas; when the Highest Ādyā Sakti became pleased with them and seeing the two dānavas, steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, addressed them, invisibly in the way of celestial voice thus: "O two Dānavas! I am exceedingly pleased with your tapasyā; so ask boon whatever you desire; I will grant it."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus they passed one thousand years in practising that great tapas; when the Highest Ādyā Śakti became pleased with them and seeing the two Dānavas, steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, address them, invisibly in the way of celestial voice thus :-- “O two Dānavas! I am exceedingly pleased with your tapasyā; so ask boon whatever you desire; I will grant it.”

[Ch 6 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus: the two Dānavas said: "O Devi! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die when we will."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus the two Dānavas said :-- “O Devī! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die when we will.”

[Ch 6 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Vāgdevī said: “O two Dānavas! Certainly, by My grace, you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be invincible of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Vagdevī said :-- “O two Dānavas! Certain by My grace, you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be invincible of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this”.

[Ch 6 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: When the Devi granted them this boon, the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic animals in the ocean. O Brāhmins! Some days thus passed away when the two powerful Dānavas saw the Brahmā, the Prajāpati, seated on the lotus of the navel of Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- When the Devī granted them this boon, the two Dānavas, puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic animals in the ocean. O Brāhmins! Some days thus passed away when the two powerful Dānavas saw the Brahmā, the Prajāpati, seated on the lotus of navel of Hari.

[Ch 6 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Doubt came on their minds and they told him with a view to fight: "O Suvrata! either fight with us, or leave off this lotus seat and go any where you like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Doubt came on their minds and they told him with a view to fight :-- “O Suvrata! Either fight with us, or leave off this lotus seat and go any where you like.

[Ch 6 Verse 42-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you be so weak, this auspicious lotus seat is not fit for you. For this should be enjoyed by the heroes. So if you be a coward, leave it quickly. Hearing these words of the Dānavas, Prajāpati, engaged in the practise of Tapasyā, saw the two great powerful heroes and began to think anxiously 'What should be done now' and waited there." Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the First Book on the preparation for war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahāpurāna Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam by Maharṣī Veda Yyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you be so weak, this auspicious lotus seat not fit for you. For this should be enjoyed by the heroes. So if you be a coward, leave it quickly”. Hearing these words of the Dānavas, Prajāpati, engaged in the practice of Tapasyā, saw the two great powerful heroes and began to think anxiously “What should be done now” and waited there. Thus ends the sixth chapter of the first Skandha on the preparation for war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
