CHAPTER XIX

On the Hymns to the Devi

व्यास उवाच

अथ प्रमृदिताः सर्वे देवा इन्द्रपुरोगमाः ।

महिषं निर्तं दृष्ट्या तुधुवुर्जपद्धिकवम् ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Then Indra and all the Devas became very glad to see the great Mahisāśura slain; they all began to praise and chant hymns to the World-Mother.

देवा ऊचुः

बहा सुजत्यवति विद्यापुरिंद मंडेशः

गजसना तदेव हरते ननु चांताकता ।

ईशना न तेउपि च भवति तया विहीतास्त-

सात्चावेय जातः स्थितिनाशकर्सी ॥ २ ॥

The Devas said: It is by thy Power that Brahmā becomes able to create this world, Viṣṇu, to preserve, and Maheśvara to destroy during the Pralaya time (the Great Dissolution) of this universe. But when they are bereft of Thy Power, they are quite unable to do such.

कौतिंर्मितः स्मृतितगी कक्णा दया लं

श्रद्धा धृतिश्व सच्छा कमला जया च ।

शुटि: कलाउथ विज्ञाय गिरिजा जया लं

तुिटः प्रमा त्वमसि बुद्धिक्मा सया च ॥ 3 ॥

विद्या क्षमा जगति कान्तराषीह मेधा

सर्वे त्वमेव विदिता घुवनत्रयेस्तिन् ।

आधिवर्षिता रत तु गणिक्षिपरागु कर्तु

को वा क्षमः सकललोकनिवासमूमे ॥ 4 ॥

Therefore, O Devi! Thou art undoubtedly the Prime Cause in the preservation and destruction of this whole Universe. O Devi; Thou art, in this world, Fame, idea and ideal, memory; Thou art the goal, mercy, compassion, faith, constancy, earth; Thou art Kamalā, the Mantra Ajapā, respiration and perspiration, nourishment, Jayā, Vijayā (the destroyer of obstacles; a name of Durgā); Thou art contentment, correct notion, measure, intellect, Ramā (Lakṣmī), (wealth), knowledge, forgiveness, beauty, intelligence; Thou art the Śakti (power) of Rudra, Thou art Girijā and the Energy of God Umā and all other forces in this universe; this is known to everyone in the three worlds. Without any or all of these forces, no one is able to perform any action. Thou art the Supreme Cause of all this world. Therefore everything rests on Thee.

तं घोराण ननु न चेदोस कुम्नोगो

धर्तु क्षमी कक्षमितमायि ते भवेताम् ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

पृथी न चेत्त्वमसि वा गानते कर्थ

स्थास्यन्तेत्यन्य निप्तिजलं वहुभारपुक्तम, || 5 ||

If Thou wert not the upholding Power, how could Kūrma (in the Tortoise Incarnation) and Ananta have upheld this world? O Mother! Wert Thou not this Earth, could all these world-load of things have rested on the sky?

ये वा सुवर्ति मनुजा अमरात्मयुजा

मायागुणैस्तव चतुर्मुखिविष्णुक्रान ।

शुभांशुविह्मयाव्युणोगमुख्यात्के

त्वामुते जनिने ते प्रभवत्ति कार्य || 6 ॥

O Mother! Those human beings that worship Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Moon, Fire, Yama, the God of Death, Vāyu, Gānésā, and the other Devas, they are certainly deluded by Thy Māyā. Could all those Devas do any action or any favour without Thy Energy?

ये जुहाति प्रविततेस्पधियो5म्य यजं

वासी सुगतामधिकृत्व हिंवः समुद्रम्।

स्वाहा न चेचास्मि ते कथमापुरद्धा

त्वामेव किं न हि यजंति ततो हि मुद्धा: ॥ 7 ॥

O Mother! Those that offer in any Sacrifice, a profuse quantity of ghee (clarified butter) as oblations to the several Devas, they are certainly conceived to be of very narrow views; Wert Thou not the Svāhā, could it have been possible for those Devas to get the offered oblations at that very instant? Certainly, therefore, they are fools and ignorant persons. There is no doubt in this.

भोगप्रदासि भवतीह चारावरणां

स्वांगैदैदासि खलु जीवनमेव नित्यम् ।

स्वीयानुसाङनि पोषयसीह

यघ्नतद्वसपानि च पालयसीति हेतोः ॥ 8 ॥

O Mother! Thou givest the several objects of nourishment and enjoyment to all the beings in this universe by Thy parts (the several transformations of these material things); it is Thou that nourishest the Devas, Thy devotees, as well as the others (the Dānavas, according to their Karma).

मातः स्वयं विरिचात्त्विचिने

विनोवाड़ीधान्यलाग्रहितांशं कटुंश वृषान् ।

नोच्छेदयन्ति पुरुषा निपुणाः कथंचिता-

सात्चाव्यतितांगं परीयासि देत्यान् ॥ 9 ॥

O Mother! As the owner of any garden plants, with pleasure the beautiful trees in his garden for his delight and, finding some of them not to bear any fruits or leaves or of a bitter taste, does not cut them off by their roots, so, O Devi! Thou hast brought into existence these Daityas out of their inferior Karmas and Thou art supported them.

यत्वं तु हिंस रणभूदिनं शरैरातिन्

देवागानासुतकेनिमानीचिद्विता ।

देहान्तरोय करणासमवाददाना

तते चरित्रिमद्मीस्तपूर्णाय ॥ 10 ॥

Knowing that the Daityas like to enjoy the celestial nymphs, Thou hast, out of compassion, killed them by their arrows in the battle-field, to afford them facilities in their rebirth in Heavens and thus to enjoy the Devas women which they could not have got in any other possible way. Therefore this Thy dealings with them are to fulfil their intentions and not to kill them.

चित्रं त्वपी यदसुभी रहिता न सन्ति

स्वच्छितितं दनुना: प्रधितप्रभावा: ।

येपां कृते जननि देहनिबन्यनं

ते क्रीडासरसल न चान्यतोज्ञ देतेुः ॥ 11 ॥

O Mother! It is a great wonder that to kill these Asuras Thou hadst to assume this Divine Body; Thou couldst have done so by Thy mere will. It seems that this act of Thine is but a mere Pastime. There is no other cause for this.

प्राप्ते कलावहू दुबटरे च काले

न त्वां भजन्ति मनुजा ननु बक्षितासे ।

धूर्सै: पुराणचतुरैहिंशिकूर्णां

सेवापराध विहितास्तव निर्मितानाम् ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Devi! Those human beings that do not worship Thee in this dreadful age of Kali, they are certainly deceived by the cunning Purāṇa makers who have deluded them to worship Hari

Book V Chapter XIX

49?

and Hara, who are Thy creations. Oh! What an amount of evil has befallen to those poor souls!

जात्या सुरांतल वशानसुरार्विदांगीछ

ये वै भजन्ति धृषि भावयुता निमगन्त् ।

धूला करे सुविमलं खलु दीपकं ते

कृपे पत्नित मनुज विजलैस्तितोये ॥ 13 ॥

O Devi! Those men know that the Devas, tormented by the Asuras, are Thy devotees, and yet they worship them; certainly such fellows, holding the lighted torches in their hands, plunge deep into the darkest waterless wells.

विद्या त्वमेव सुखदासुखदारप्रयविद्या

मालत्वमेव जननातिंहरा नराणाम् ।

भोहाश्रधिस्तु कलिता किल मन्द्रधीधि-

नारायिता जननि भोगपरैस्तधारघोः ॥ 14 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Vidyā (Blissful Intelligence) and Thou grantest pleasure and liberation; Thou art the Avidyā, (Great Delusion) and thus Thou causest bondage and pain in this world. O Mother! Thou only destroyest the affliction of the human beings; those that want liberation worship Thee, and those that are ignorant and attached to worldly enjoyments do not worship Thee.

ब्रहा हरश्र हरिय्यनिश शरणवं

पादाम्बुज तव भजन्ति सुरातधान्ये ।

रहै न येड्यपतयो मनसा भजन्ति

भान्ता: पतन्ति सततं भवमात्रे ने ॥ 15 ॥

What more can be said than this, that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa and the other Devas incessantly worship Thy adorable lotus-feet; but those men that are of dull intellect and are mistaken, they do not meditate Thy feet and, therefore, they come again and again into this ocean of world.

चपिड त्वर्धप्रिलजोत्थरज:प्रसादैर्द्वा

कोर्ति सकलं भुवर्न भवादी ।

शीरिश याति खलु संहते हस्तु

त्वां सेवते न मनुजस्टित्व दुर्भागोउली ॥ 16 ॥

O Candika! It is through the grace of the dust of Thy lotus-feet that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and

Mahesvara are creating, preserving and destroying this universe. Therefore, O Goddess! Those men that do not serve Thee, are certainly very unfortunate.

वायदेवता त्वमसि देख सुरासुराणों

वर्तु न तेप्रसवरा: प्रभवित्न शक्ता: ।

त्वं चेभ्युवे वससि नैव चंद्व तेनां

यस्माद्वतिन मनुजा न हि तहिहीना: ॥ 17 ॥

O Mother of the Universe! Thou art the Goddess of speech of the Suras and the Asuras; thus if Thou didst not dwell in their mouths, they would not have been able to utter a single word; therefore, O Goddess! How can men speak when they are thus deprived of Thee!

ग्रणते हरित्यं भृगुणा कुपितेन कामं

मीनाे बभूव कमठः खलु सुकास्तु ।

पश्राब्रसि इति यश्छलकुबरायां

तान्सेवतां जननि मृत्युभयं न किं स्यात् ॥ 18 ॥

O Mother! It is due to the curse of Bhrgu Muni that Hari takes several incarnations as Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and deceitful Dwarf Incarnations; all these show clearly the dependence of Hari. How, then, can they avoid the fear of death when they serve these dependent incarnations!

शम्भो: परपात् भुवि सिलामिद्ध प्रसिद्ध

शापेन तेन च भृगतीक्षिति नातस्य ।

तं ये नरा भृवि भवन्ति कमालिंनं

तु तेमां सुखं कथमिह्वी परम मातः ॥ १९ ॥

O Mother! It is well known that the male generative organ of Śambhu, the Mahādeva fell unto the ground, owing to the curse of Bhrgu Muni, when he went to the hermitage of the Rsis. How can, then, happiness come in this world or in the next, to those who worship such a Śambhu who wears human skulls on His body!

योअभूव्राननगणाधियपनिर्देशणातं

ये भक्तिन मनुजा विलापप्रपना: ।

जानान्ति ते न सकलाधीक्षतप्रदारी

त्वां देव विश्वजनर्नी सुखलेनवीयाम् ॥ 20 ॥

O Devi! Those that worship Gangeśa, born of the above qualified Mahā Deva are awfully mistaken; they are especially quite ignorant of Thee, the Goddess of the Universe, that can be easily worshipped and that can give the fourfold aims of human existence.

वित्रं त्वयारिजनात्रापि द्वराद्र-

भावाब्द्वा रणे हितारशेर्यमिता धुलोकम् ।

नोचेत्वकर्मनिधिते निरये नितानं

दुःखातिछुःखगतिमाद्वमापतेसा ॥ 21 ॥

O Devi! It is out of Thy kindness that Thou hast slain with Thy arrows the enemies and thus hast translated them into Heavens; otherwise they would have certainly gone down to Hell owing to their own Karmic effects.

ब्रह्मा हरश हरित्यत गर्वीभावा-

ज्ञानस्ति तेक्षा विद्धया न तव प्रभावम् ।

कें-न्ने भवन्ति मनुजा विदितुं समर्थः।

संभोहितासव युगीरमितप्रभावः ॥ 2 2 ॥

Brahmā, Hari, Hara and the other Devas cannot realise Thy greatness; how can, then, ordinary men know Thee, when they are deluded by immeasurably strong Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities.

क्रिनश्यन्ति तेपि मुनवस्तव तुविंभाव्यं

पादाम्बुजं न हि भजन्ति विमूढचिता: ।

सूवार्णिनसेवनपरा: परमार्थतन्त्च ज्ञातं

न तैः श्रुतिगतरैपि वेदसारम् ॥ 23 ॥

O Mother! Those who do not worship Thy lotus-feet as very hard to be brought within this mind and therefore worship this visible Sun and Fire, they cannot grasp the Essence of the Vedas, demonstrated by hundreds of passages of Śruti; they are deluded and simply suffer pains.

मन्ये गुणात्सव भृवि प्रशितप्रभावाः।

कुर्यन्ति ये हि विमुखात्रनु भक्तिभावात् ।

लोकान्स्वबुद्धिरचितैर्विविधागमंशु

विष्यौरिभास्करणगेणरावत्थाय ॥ 24 ॥

O Mother! I think that the influences of Thy Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities are widely

known in this world; those qualities as taught in various deluding schools of Tantras by various persons, stimulate people to the worship of Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Sun and Gangeśa and thus detract them from worshipping Thee.

कुर्विति चे तत पदादिमुखाजराशयान- स्वोक्तामार्थैतिरावर्धनभक्तियोगैः । तेचां न कृष्यसि द्वयं कुर्वेप्रदिक्ये

त्वं तान्योहमन्यिनिपुणान्यथस्थलं च ॥ 25 ॥

O Mother! Those that detract thus the Brāhmaṇas from worshiping Thy lotus-feet and advise them through the Āgamas, to worship Hari, Hara and others, Thou dost not get angry with them, rather Thou dost shew Thy kindness to them and make them widely celebrated as possessing the occult powers of enchanting, bringing others under their control, or attracting towards them various other persons.

तूर्वे युगे भवति चातिवलं गुणस्य

तृर्व्येन तेन मथितान्यसदागमानि ।

त्वां गोपवन्ति निपुणा: कवयः कलौ वै

त्वकल्पित्यासुर्यगगानि संस्तुवन्ति ॥ 26 ॥

In the Satya Yuga, Sativa Guna was more powerful and therefore the untrue Śāstras could not rear their heads; but in this Kali Age, owing to the Satva Guna being not so powerful, the lower qualities have got preponderance; so these so called clever Pandits instead of worshipping Thee, worship Hari, Hara and the other Devas, the products of their fancy and hide Thee.

ध्यायपिति मुक्तिफलां घुवि योगसिद्धां

विद्यां पर्चा च मुनवोस्तिविशुद्धसत्ता: ।

ते नाप्युवर्ति जननीजरेते तु दुःखं

धन्यास्त एव मनुजास्तविय वे वित्तिना : ॥ 27 ॥

O Mother! Thou art the Brahma Vidya, the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness, Thou givest liberation to Thy devotees when they succeed in their Yogas. Therefore the pure Sattvik Munis meditate on Thee and Thee alone. Those that get themselves diluted in Thee, they are very

Book V Chapter XIX

blessed; what more to speak of them in their praise, they will no longer have to suffer any pains in their mother's wombs!

विष्छक्तिरित परमात्मिने येन सोर्धि

व्यक्तो जगत्सु विदितो भवकृत्यक्तां ।

को2-मस्त्वया विरहितः प्रभवत्युष्मिन्कर्तुं

विद्धुर्विमि सघतिलतं स्वशलम्भा ॥ 28 ॥

O Mother! Thou art inherent as Cit Śakti (the power of consciousness) in the Supreme Spirit and therefore He is become manifest specially as this Great Cosmos and becomes known as the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of this world, fashioned out of five elements. O Devi! What male can by his own power work out this Jagat Prapañca, enjoy it and move in this, without the aid of Thy power.

तत्वानि चिवित्रितानि जगाधितुर्न

किं वा क्षामाणि जगाद्व यतो जड़ानि ।

किं चेन्रिदायाणि गुणकर्मवृतानि सन्ति

देवि तव्या चिकित्तिका फलं प्रवतुम् ॥ 29 ॥

O Bhagavatī! This universe has been created by Thee; Thou art, therefore, its Mother. The twenty-four Essences or Tattvas are inert; how can they without Thy Citśakti, create this universe? O Devi! Never can these senses and organs, endowed with Guna and Karma, do any work or bestow any fruits without Thy energy.

देवा मढ्रेब्धपि हुतं गुनिभि: स्वभागं

गृह्मीयुग्ब विधित्यतिपादितं किम।

स्वाहा न चेचस्मित तत्र निमितभूता

तस्मात्मेवे ननु पालयसीव विश्यु ॥ ३० ॥

O Mother! Wert thou not Svāhā, the instrumental cause in the sacrifice, how could the Devas have got their shares of the ghee offered in the Yajñas by the Munis! Therefore, O Devi! Thou art, no doubt, preserving this universe.

सर्वे तयेद्वापित्वं निवहितं भवादौ

त्वं पासि वे हरित्रप्रमुखान्दिगीणान ।

कालोर्जम विश्वापि ते चरितं भवाधों

जानन्ति नैव मनुजा: क्व नु मन्दभागया: ॥ 31 ॥

O Bhagavati! It is Thou that hast created this

world in the beginning; it is Thou that art preserving the gods Hari, Hara and others; it is Thou art destroying this universe. Therefore, O Brahman! The Devas cannot know Thy deeds; how can, then, the men who are of dull intellect, know Thee.

हत्वाउपुरं महिषक्रणधरं महोरं

माततस्वया सुरागण: किल रक्षितोउम् ।

कां ते स्तुति जननि मन्दधियो विद्यामो वेता

गार्त तत यथार्थतया न जगम्: ॥ 32 ॥

O Mother! Thou has now saved the Devas by killing this terrible Mahisāsura. O Mother! All the Vedas have not been able to know exactly all Thy movements; how can we, of dull intellect, praise Thee!

कार्यं कृतं जगति नो यदसौ

दुरात्मा वैरी हतो घुवनकंटकतुर्बिधायः ।

कीति: कृता ननु जगतयु कृपा विधेय।

उपसमांधि याति जननि प्रक्षितप्रभावे ॥ 33 ॥

O Mother! Thou has served our cause by killing our enemy, the wicked Dānava, the inconceivable source of pain to all the world; by this act of Thine, Thy fame has spread far and wide in this universe; therefore, O Thou of renowned prowess! Thou art the Mother of this world; save us, and maintain us by Thy mercy.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी तानुवाच घुतुस्वग ।

अन्यत्कारं च दुःसाध्यं बुवन्तु सुरसना: ॥ 34 ॥

यदा यदा हि देवानां कार्ये स्यादितुर्पुंटम् ।

समतैव्याङ्गं तदा शीघं नागरविष्यामि चापदम् ॥ 35 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The Devas having praised the Devi thus, the Devi addressed them gently: "O Devas! Say it you have any other difficult thing for Me to do; remember Me whenever any difficult crisis to you; I will destroy that evil.

देवा ऊचुः

सर्वे कृत्ते त्वया देपे कवर्न नः खलु साम्पतम् ।

घटयं निहतः श्रुत्रमाकां महिषासुरः ॥ ३६ ॥

The Devas said: "O Devi! All our purposes

have been served when Thou hast killed lately our enemy Mahisāsura.

सारित्यामो यथा तेज्य सदैव पदपूक्नम् ।

तबा कुरु जन्यन्तर्पिक्त लव्य्ययच्छुततम् ॥ 37 ॥

Now dost Thou do for us so that we can always recollect Thy lotus feet, and our Bhakti be firm and steadfast towards Thee.

अपराधसहस्वाणि मातैव सहते सदा ।

इति जात्वा जगद्योति न भजने कुतो जना: ॥ 38 ॥

It is only the Mother that bears the thousand offences of the son; we, therefore, cannot say why men, knowing this, do not worship the Mother of the Universe.

ढ़ो सुभाणीं तु देहेस्मितयोः सख्यं नितन्तम ।

नान्यः सखा तृनीयोप्रति योगपरां सहोत ॥  ३ ९ ॥

There are two birds always dwelling in this body, Jivātmā (human soul) and the Paramāmtā (the Supreme Soul). They are so very intimate friends towards each other that they never separate. But there is no other third friend that can bear the faults of these two.

तस्माजीवः सखायं त्वां हित्वा किं नु कारिष्यत ।

पाणतामा मन्दभायोउसी सुरामानुवधोनिषु ॥ 40 ॥

Therefore the embodied soul that forsakes Thee, his friend, can never attain any welfare; what more to as on this! That vicious soul is very unlucky amidst the Devas and men, no doubt.

प्राप्य देहं सुतुष्पारं न सभरेनां नराधम: ।

मनसा कर्माण वाचा बुभः सत्यं पुनः पुनः ॥ 4 1 ॥

He who on attaining this excellent human body, attained with much difficulty, does not remember Thee frequently by words and deeds, is certainly the vilest of men.

सुखे वाध्यव बा दुःखे वं नः शरणमद्धूनम् ।

पाहि नः सत्तत देवि सर्वैस्त्व वरायपुः ॥ 4 2 ॥

अन्यथा शरणं नासि त्वरवंबुंजरेणुतः ।

O Devi! Whether in times of distress or happiness, Thou art our Saviour; therefore dost Thou protect us with Thy best weapons. O Devi! There is no other means of our security than the Grace of the dust of Thy Feet.

एवं स्तुता सुरैद्वी तकैवांतरधीयत ॥ 43 ॥

विसयं परमं जगमूदैवास्ता वीक्ष्य निर्नातम् ।

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे पद्धमस्कन्दे

एकानिविशोरप्रदाय: 11 19 11

Vyāsa said: “O king! The Devas having prayed to the Devi thus, the Devi vanished then and there. The Devas, seeing the disappearance of the Devi, were sufficiently struck with surprise.

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the prayer and hymns to the Devi in Śrīmaddevi-bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Unreadable]

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

