CHAPTER VII

On the Asvins Drinking the Soma cup

ध्यास उवाच

द्रते ग्रहे तु राजेन्द्र वासवः कुपितो भृणम् ।

प्रोवाच च्यवन्त तन दर्शनबलमात्मतः ॥ १ ॥

मा बढ़ावन्यो मयाद्वामियां त्वं कतुर्महसि ।

विध्यामि दिषं तं त्वां विश्वरूपमिवापरम् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma juice was given to the two Aśvins, Indra became very angry and showing his strength, spoke thus to the Muni Cyavana. “O Brāhmaṇa! Never will you be able to endow him with such a high honour. When you have shown towards me your enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like Viśvarūpa.”

च्यवन उवाच

मावमंस्या महात्मानी रूपद्रविषणवर्चौ ।

यो चक्रतुर्मी मयवन्युदारकमिवायपरम् ॥ ३ ॥

त्रते तां विबुधाश्राये कवं वाददते ग्रहम् ।

अंशभावपि देदेन्द्र देवी विद्धि परन्ती ॥ ४ ॥

Cyavana said: “O Indra! Do not insult the two high-souled Asvins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me look like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two powerful Asvins can do the same towards you.

इन उदय

भिपजी नाहंतः कामं ग्रहं येते कंक्षेचन ।

यदि दिल्सिय मन्त्रान्न शिरणछेद्यायिय सांग्रतम् ॥ 5 ॥

Indra said: “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your head.”

व्यास उवाच

अनानुद्य तु तुढाक्यं वासवस्य च भागंवः ।

प्रहं तु प्राहयामास भतसंधित्व नं भृणम् ॥ 6 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Ornament to the race of Bharata!

At these words of Indra, the Muni made the Asvins accept the Soma cup, thus highly insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words.

सोमपात्रं वटा तान्यां गृहीतं तु पिपायमा ।

समीयेक वलापिष्टेव इयं चवनमब्बित् ॥ ७ ॥

आभ्यामर्थाय सोमां तं ग्राहीत्ययसि चेत्स्वयम् ।

वज्जं तु प्रहिष्यामि विश्वरूपमिवायम् ॥ ८ ॥

When the two Aśvins accepted the cup with a desire to drink the Soma thereof, the powerful Indra saw it and said: "If you make them drink Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on your head exactly in the same way as I did towards Viśvarāpū."

वासवेदैवमुक्तसु भार्थश्रातिराविंतः ।

जग्राह विधित्वत्सोममाधिश्छ्यामतिभूयन्ति ॥ 9 ॥

The Muni became violently angry at this and made the Aśvins drink the Soma according to due rites and ceremonies.

इन्होरिण प्राक्षित्कोपाद्धजमर्चे ख्यमायुधम् ।

पश्यतां सर्वैदेवानां सूर्यकोटिममुष्पम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रेरितं चाणर्शि प्रैक्ष्य च्यवनस्तपास ततः ।

स्तंभयामास वज्जं स ग्राकस्यामिततेजसः ॥ 11 ॥

Indra, too, angrily hurled thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The weapons shed lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra's thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue of his Tapas.

Book VII Chapter VII

कृत्यया स महाबाहुरिंहं हन्तुमिहोत्थः ।

जुहावानी शृतं हृद्यं मनेण मुनिससना: ॥ 12 ॥

तत्र कृत्या ससुन्धया च्यवनस्य तपोवलात् ।

प्रबलः पुरुषः कृरी बृहकाक्यो महासुरः ॥ 13 ॥

The powerful Muni then adopted black magic to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Cyavana, of unbounded lustre, there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krtyā (A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes). And out of Krtyā originated a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, a great Demon.

मटो नाम महावोरो भयदः प्राणिनाम्हि ।

शरीरे पर्वताकारसीधारदोषुं घयानकः ॥ १४ ॥

चतरक्षायता दंद्युं योजनानां शर्त शन्मू ।

इते त्वस्य दर्शना बचपुदर्शयोजनाः ॥ 15 ॥

The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrifying to all the beings. His body was huge like a mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other teeth were ten Yojanas long.

बाहू पर्वतसिक्षानायाती क्ररूर्गीनों ।

जिङ्धा तु भीषणा कृता लेलिहाना नभस्तलम् ॥ 16 ॥

His arms were like mountains, very long and fierce, tongue, horrible, rough and so very long that it reached up to the heavens.

श्रील तु गिरियुकुमा काटिना भीषणा घुणम् ।

नखा व्यानपत्रख्यतः केनाश्रातीव भीषणाः ॥ 17 ॥

His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious appearance; nails resembled tiger's, hair is horrible.

शरीरं कजलाभ च तस्य चारयं भयानकम् ।

नेत्रे दावानलग्रख्ये भीषणेउतिभयानके ॥ 18 ॥

His body was jet black like lamp black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire and awful.

हनुरोका स्थिता तस्य भूमावेका दिवं गता ।

एवंविधः सपुचमो मदो नाम बहुनगु: ॥ 19 ॥

One of his jaws touched the ground and the other

touched the heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada of hug form.

तं विलोक्य सुगा: सर्वे भयमाजामूर्तेमा ।

इन्द्रिपि भयसंज्ञतो यूद्वाय न मनो दधे ॥ 20 ॥

Looking at him, the Devas became suddenly frightened; Indra, too, got very much terrified at the sight of him and did not want to have any more fight. दैत्योर्पि वदने कामं वज्ञमात्य संस्थितः ।

ध्यानं नभो घोरपृटिष्सित्व जगतवर्ग्य ॥ 21 ॥

The Demon swal owed Indra's thunderbolt, looked at the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe.

स भक्षयिष्यन्सैनुक्दः शनक्रतुभुपार्वत् ।

चुकूगुशु सुग: सर्वे हा हातः: स्मेति संशित्यः ॥ 22 ॥

इत्रः सर्पितबाहुतु मुभुक्षुर्वेग्रमेतिकात् ।

न शशाक पचिं तत्स्मप्रतूत् पाकमासनः ॥ 23 ॥

He became infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the Devas cried aloud: "Alas! We are disabled by Mantrams and the outerhood thought he wanted to do so.

वज्रस्तः सुरैणास्तवी बीक्ष्य कालसाधिमम् ।

सस्मार मनसा तत्र गुर्भ समयकोविदम् ॥ 24 ॥

The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt in his hand, looked on the Demon as Death personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in the knowledge which is the proper time to perform a certain thing.

सरणाद्वाजगामायु बृह्म्यतिहदार्थी: ।

गुरुस्तत्मयं दूद्वा विमतिसदुर्ग मत् ॥ 25 ॥

The liberal-minded Brhaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that he is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot.

विद्यार्थ मनसा कृत्यं तभ्याच गर्जपतिम् ।

दुःसाध्योरयं महाम-नैस्वयं वज्जेण वासव ॥ 26 ॥

He then judged what to do in the present crisis and told Indra: "O Indra! This cannot be averted even by Mantrams; what to speak of of thunderbolt! असुरी मदसंसृत्य यजकुष्ठात्समूषित्वतः ।

तपोबतमुषे: सम्यकन्यबन्य महावल ॥ 27 ॥

This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas of the Cyavana Muni. The Muni's power is especially felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any other Deva will be able to resist him. Know this.

अनिवार्य हुयं शजुस्ववा देखैतथा प्रथा ।

गरणं याहि देतेश च्यवनस्य महात्मनः ॥ 28 ॥

Even Brahmā cannot thwart the anger of one who is devoted to the Śakti, the Highest Force; Cyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest Śakti. So no other body is able to defeat him.

स निवारविता नूतं कृत्यामात्मकृतां किल ।

न विवारवितुं शक्ताः शक्तिभक्तधं ववित् ॥ 29 ॥

He is the man himself to take back the Krtyā that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तो गुरणा शक्रसदागच्छनुपिं प्रति ।

प्रणाय शिरसा नप्रस्तमुवाच भयास्वितः ॥ 30 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went to the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him.

भ्रमस मुनिशाष्टूल शमयासुरमुच्छात् ।

प्रसजो भव सर्वैल वचनं ते कौण्यमूढ् ॥ 31 ॥

सोमाहर्षिक्षिनवेतावरूपभृति भारी ।

भविष्यतः सत्यमेतद्धो विध प्रसीद मे ॥ 32 ॥

O Muni! Forgive me and stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One! Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhārgava! The two Aświns will, from this day, have the right to drink the Soma juice. This I speak out to you in truth. O Brāhmana! Be graciously pleased unto me.

मिथ्या ते नोह्यो होय भवत्वेल लोपोन ।

जाने त्वमपि धर्मत्र मिथ्या नेव कार्यस्थि ॥ 33 ॥

सोमपार्विश्नोलौ तल्कृतौ च सदैव हि ।

भविष्यतक्षा शपतिं: कॉर्तिल्ते विपुला भवेत् ॥ 34 ॥

मया यद्रिकृतं कर्म सर्वथा मुनिसन्तम ।

परीक्षार्य तु त्विद्यं तव वीर्घकाशनम् ॥ 35 ॥

O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never be able to make your word swerve from truth. The two ASvins will, by your grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and the King Saryatis fame will also know no bounds. O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to test your prowess in Tapas.

प्रसादं कुक मे बहान्यदं संहर चोत्थितम् ।

कल्पणं सर्वदैवानां तथा घृते विधीयतान् ॥ 36 ॥

O Brāhmaṇa! Now do this favour to me and take back your, this Demon Mada sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. There is no doubt in this.

एवमुक्तसु शक्रेना चव्बनः परमार्थवित् ।

संजहार तपःकोपसमुपवं चितीधजम् ॥ 37 ॥

देवमाधाय्य संविन्न भार्थवसु मदं ततः ।

व्यभजल्लीषु पानेपु घृतेषु भुगायासु च ॥ 38 ॥

Thus spoken piteously by Indra, Cyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the Maharṣi Cyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed and anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and (4) hunting animals.

मदं विज्ञज्य देवेन्द्रप्राधास्य चकित्तं भिया ।

संस्थाय च सुरात्मवान्यं तस्य व्यावर्तिन् ॥ 39 ॥

When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the terror stricken Devas felt themselves relived and saved and got consoled.

ततस्तु संस्कृतं सोयं वास्वाय महात्मने ।

अधिष्यां सर्वेधर्तमाय पाययासम सर्पिनः ॥ 40 ॥

Cyavana then placed the Devas in their respective stations and completed the sacrifice. At last, the religious Bhārgava made first Indra and then the two Aśvins drink the Soma Cups.

एवं तो च्चवनेनायाविश्रुनी तदिपुत्रकी ।

विहिती सोमपी राजन-सर्वथा तपसो बलत् ॥ 4 1 ॥

सरसद्वीप विश्यातां जाते पूर्यविमणिकात् ।

आश्रमसु पुनेः सम्यक्युविध्वां विश्वतो5पवत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

Book VII Chapter VIII

O King! Thus Cyavana had the Aśvins their Soma Cups by virtue of his power of Tapas. Theue the tank with the sacrificial post Yūpa became famous and the Muni's Aśrama also was renowned and honoured in all respects on the surface of the earth.

श्यांतिराति संतुहो हाभवतेन कर्मण ।

यजं समाय्य नगरे जगाम सचिवेद्युं: ॥ 4 3 ॥

The King Śaryāti, too, became very glad at this sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with his ministers to his city.

राज्यं चकार धर्मज्ञो मनुपुरुः प्रतपायन् ।

आन्तरितस्य पुत्रोभूदानतरिद्धतेनोर्षवत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

The Manu's son, the powerful religious King Śaryāti governed his kingdom, free from any obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named Ānarta; and Ānarta had a son named Revata born to him.

सोउतः समुद्रे नगरी विमियांर कुशस्थतीम् ।

आस्थितो घृताक्रिययानानतौदीनरिदम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Revata built the city of Kuśasthali in the midst of the ocean and began to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named Ānarta and others.

तस्य पुरगतं जते ककुषिषजोष्ठमुतनम् ।

पूत्री च त्वेति नाना सुन्दरी शुभलक्षण ॥ 46 ॥

Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi was the eldest and of pure character. He had one daughter very beautiful named Revatī, endowed with all auspicious qualities.

वरयोग्या यदा जाता तदाराजा च रेततः ।

चिन्तयामास राजेन्द्रो राजपुत्रान्कुलोद्धवान् ॥ 47 ॥

When the daughter reached a marriageable age, the King began to think where he could get a prince of a good noble family.

रेततं नाम च गिरिमाश्रितः पृथिवीपति: ।

चकार राज्यं बलवानानंतैनु नराधिधः ॥ 4 8 ॥

That powerful King began to govern his people Anartas, with his headquarters at the Raivata hill. विधिन्य पनसा राजा कृस्ये देवा यम सुता ।

गाला पृष्ठथामि बहाण्यं सर्वत्रं सुर्पृजितम् ॥ 49 ॥

इति सश्रित्यं युपाल: सुतामादाय रेवतीम् ।

बहालोकं जगामाशु प्रडुकाम: चितामहम् ॥ 50 ॥

“Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought and settled that he would go to Brahmā and ask him, the venerable omniscient Prajāpati, worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka.

यत्र देवाङ्ग यज्ञा श्रद्धासि पर्वतासथा ।

अध्यय: सरिताशीय दिध्यकरणयः स्थितः ॥ 51 ॥

There the Devas, Yajñas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and rivers all were shining with luminous bodies.

त्रश्य: सिद्धान्यर्वाः प्रजाग्राणास्तथा ।

तस्थु: प्रांजलयः सर्वे सुव्रन्तघु पुरातना: ॥ 52 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्शिभाग्रते महापुराणो सत्यनकन्ये

सप्तमोउध्याः ॥ 53 ॥ 

There the eternal Rsis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Pannages and Čarṇapas were singing hymns to Brahmā, standing with folded hands.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin Aśvīns (trinking the Soma Cup in Srimaddevībhāgava) am, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

|

Book VII Chapter VIII

