[Ch 7 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma juice was given to the two Aśvins, Indra became very angry and showing his strength, spoke thus to the Muni Cyavana. “O Brāhmaṇa! Never will you be able to endow him with such a high honour. When you have shown towards me your enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like Viśvarūpa.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma juice was given to the two Aśvins, Indra became very angry and showing his strength, spoke thus to the Muni Cyavana. O Brāhmaṇa! Never will you be able to endow him with such a high honour. When you have shewn towards me your enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like Viśvarūpa.

[Ch 7 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana said: “O Indra! Do not insult the two high-souled Asvins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me look like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two powerful Asvins can do the same towards you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana said :-- “O Indra! Do not insult the two highsouled Aśvins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me look like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two powerful Aśvins can do the same towards you.”

[Ch 7 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said: “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your head.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your head.”

[Ch 7 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Ornament to the race of Bharata! At these words of Indra, the Muni made the Asvins accept the Soma cup, thus highly insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Ornament to the race of Bharata! At these words of Indra, the Muni made the Aśvins accept the Soma cup, thus highly insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words.

[Ch 7 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the two Aśvins accepted the cup with a desire to drink the Soma thereof, the powerful Indra saw it and said: "If you make them drink Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on your head exactly in the same way as I did towards Viśvarāpū."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the two Aśvins accepted the cup with a desire to drink the Soma thereof, the powerful Indra saw it and said :-- “If you make them drink Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on your head exactly in the same way as I did towards Viśvarūpa.”

[Ch 7 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni became violently angry at this and made the Aśvins drink the Soma according to due rites and ceremonies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni became violently angry at this and made the Aśvins drink the Soma according to due rites and ceremonies.

[Ch 7 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, too, angrily hurled thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The weapons shed lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra's thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue of his Tapas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, too, angrily hurled thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The weapon shed lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra’s thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue of his Tapas.

[Ch 7 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful Muni then adopted black magic to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Cyavana, of unbounded lustre, there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krtyā (A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes). And out of Krtyā originated a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, a great Demon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful Muni then adopted black magic to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Cyavana, of unbounded lustre, there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krityā (A female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes). And out of Krityā originated a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, a great Demon.

[Ch 7 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrifying to all the beings. His body was huge like a mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other teeth were ten Yojanas long.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrifying to all the beings. His body was huge like a mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other teeth were ten Yojanas long.

[Ch 7 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His arms were like mountains, very long and fierce, tongue, horrible, rough and so very long that it reached up to the heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His arms were like mountains, very long and fierce; tongue, horrible, rough and so very long that it reached up to the heavens.

[Ch 7 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious appearance; nails resembled tiger's, hair is horrible.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious appearance; nails resembled tiger’s, hairs horrible.

[Ch 7 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► His body was jet black like lamp black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire and awful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► His body was jet black like lamp black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire and awful.

[Ch 7 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One of his jaws touched the ground and the other touched the heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada of hug form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One of his jaws touched the ground and the other touched the heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada, of huge form.

[Ch 7 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Demon swal owed Indra's thunderbolt, looked at the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Demon swallowed Indra’s thunderbolt, looked at the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe.

[Ch 7 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He became infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the Devas cried aloud: "Alas! We are disabled by Mantrams and the outerhood thought he wanted to do so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He became infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the Devas cried aloud :-- “Alas! We are slain.” Indra had his arms disabled by Mantrams and so he could

[Ch 7 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt in his hand, looked on the Demon as Death personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in the knowledge which is the proper time to perform a certain thing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt in his hand, looked on the Demon as Death personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in the knowledge which is the proper time to perform a certain thing.

[Ch 7 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The liberal-minded Brhaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that he is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The liberal-minded Brihaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that he is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot.

[Ch 7 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas of the Cyavana Muni. The Muni's power is especially felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any other Deva will be able to resist him. Know this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas of the Cyavana Muni. The Muni’s power is especially felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any other Deva will be able to resist him. Know this.

[Ch 7 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even Brahmā cannot thwart the anger of one who is devoted to the Śakti, the Highest Force; Cyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest Śakti. So no other body is able to defeat him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even Brahmā cannot thwart the anger of one who is devoted to the Śakti, the Highest Force; Cyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest Śakti. So no other body is able to defeat him.

[Ch 7 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is the man himself to take back the Krtyā that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni."
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is the man himself to take back the Krityā that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni.”

[Ch 7 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went to the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went to the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him.

[Ch 7 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Forgive me and stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One! Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhārgava! The two Aświns will, from this day, have the right to drink the Soma juice. This I speak out to you in truth. O Brāhmana! Be graciously pleased unto me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Muni! Forgive me and stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One! Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhārgava! The two Aśvins will, from this day, have the right to drink the Some juice. This I speak out to you in truth. O Brāhmaṇa! Be graciously pleased unto me.

[Ch 7 Verse 33-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never be able to make your word swerve from truth. The two ASvins will, by your grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and the King Saryatis fame will also know no bounds. O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to test your prowess in Tapas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never be able to make your word swerve from truth. The two Aśvins will, by your grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and the King Śaryāti’s fame will also know no bounds. O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to test your prowess in Tapas.

[Ch 7 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! Now do this favour to me and take back your, this Demon Mada sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! Now do this favour to me and take back your, this Demon Mada, sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. There is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 7 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus spoken piteously by Indra, Cyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the Maharṣi Cyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed and anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and (4) hunting animals.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus spoken piteously by Indra, Cyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the Maharṣi Cyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed and anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and (4) hunting animals.

[Ch 7 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the terror stricken Devas felt themselves relived and saved and got consoled.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the terror stricken Devas felt themselves relieved and saved and got consoled.

[Ch 7 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Cyavana then placed the Devas in their respective stations and completed the sacrifice. At last, the religious Bhārgava made first Indra and then the two Aśvins drink the Soma Cups.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Cyavana then placed the Devas in their respective stations and completed the sacrifice. As last, the religious Bhārgava made first Indra and then the two Aśvins drink the Soma Cups.

[Ch 7 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus Cyavana had the Aśvins their Soma Cups by virtue of his power of Tapas. Theue the tank with the sacrificial post Yūpa became famous and the Muni's Aśrama also was renowned and honoured in all respects on the surface of the earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus Cyavana had the Aśvins their Soma Cups by virtue of his power of Tapas. Thence the tank with the sacrificial post Yūpa became famous and the Muni’s Āśrama also was renowned and honoured in all respects. The

[Ch 7 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King Śaryāti, too, became very glad at this sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with his ministers to his city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► King Śaryāti, too, became very glad at this sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with his ministers to his city.

[Ch 7 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Manu's son, the powerful religious King Śaryāti governed his kingdom, free from any obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named Ānarta; and Ānarta had a son named Revata born to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Manu’s son, the powerful religious King Śaryāti governed his kingdom, free from any obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named Ānarta; and Ānarta had a son named Revata born to him.

[Ch 7 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Revata built the city of Kuśasthali in the midst of the ocean and began to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named Ānarta and others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Revata built the city of Kuśasthalī in the midst of the ocean and began to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named Ānarta and others.

[Ch 7 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi was the eldest and of pure character. He had one daughter very beautiful named Revatī, endowed with all auspicious qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi was the eldest and of pure character. He had one daughter very beautiful named Revatī, endowed with all auspicious qualities.

[Ch 7 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the daughter reached a marriageable age, the King began to think where he could get a prince of a good noble family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the daughter reached a marriageable age, the King began to think where he could get a prince of a good noble family.

[Ch 7 Verse 48-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought and settled that he would go to Brahmā and ask him, the venerable omniscient Prajāpati, worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought and settled that he would go to Brahmā and ask him, the venerable omniscient Prajāpati, worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with his daughter Revatī to the Brahmaloka.

[Ch 7 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There the Devas, Yajñas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and rivers all were shining with luminous bodies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There the Devas, Yajñas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and rivers all were shining with luminous bodies.

[Ch 7 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There the eternal Rsis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Pannages and Čarṇapas were singing hymns to Brahmā, standing with folded hands. Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin Aśvīns (trinking the Soma Cup in Srimaddevībhāgava) am, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There the eternal Ṛṣis, Siddhas, Gandharbas, Pannagas and Cāranas were singing hymns to Brahmā, standing with folded hands. Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin Aśvins drinking the Soma Cup in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
