[Ch 12 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Maharsis! The son of the above mentioned Budha is the greatly religious Purūravā, of a very charitable disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born of a kṣatriya woman named Ila; and I will now describe how this Purūravā was born of Ila and Budha—kindly listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Mahārṣis! The son of the above mentioned Budha is the greatly religious Pururavā, of a very charitable disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born of a kshattriya woman named Ilā; and I will now describe how this Pururavā was born of Ilā and Budha, kindly listen.

[Ch 12 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, there was a king named Sadyumna, very truthful and highly capable in keeping his senses under control.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore there was a king named Sudyumna, very truthful and highly capable in keeping his senses under control.

[Ch 12 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once upon a time, wearing beautiful earrings, with extraordinary bow named \( \overline{A} \) jagab and holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on hunt to a forest, riding on a horse, born of the country Sindhu, surrounded by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of forest, the king got for this šikār, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, buffalo, young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other animals fit for sacrificial purposes; thus, he went on deep into the interior of the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once on a time, wearing beautiful ear-rings, with extraordinary bow named Ājagab and holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on hunt to a forest, riding on a horse, born of the country Sindhu, surrounded by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of forest, the king got for his shikār, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, buffalo, young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other animals fit for sacrificial purposes; thus he went on deep into the interior of the forest.

[Ch 12 Verse 6-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This divine forest was adorned with rows of Mandāra trees and situated at the bottom of Mount Sumeru. Various trees and flowers were spreading the beauty of the forest all around; at places were Aśoka creepers, Vakula, Sāl, Tāl, Tamāl, Campak, Panasa, mangoe, Nīp, Madhūka, pomegranate, cocoanut, Yūthikā, plantain, kunda creeper, and various other trees and flowers; at some other places the bowers formed of Mādhavī creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This divine forest was adorned with rows of Mandāra trees and situated at the bottom of the mount Sumeru. Various trees and flowers were spreading the beauty of the forest all around; at places were Asoka creepers, Vakula, Sāl, Tāl, Tamāl, Champak, Panasa, mangoe, Nīp, Madhūka, pomegranate, cocoanut, Yūthikā, plantain, kunda creeper, and various other trees and flowers; at some other places the bowers formed of Mādhavi creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around.

[Ch 12 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There were lakes and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with swans, kārandavas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on their banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds; and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees—humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There were tanks and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with swans, kāraṇḍavas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on their banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds; and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there.

[Ch 12 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, the Rājarsī Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see his interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos and beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned into a mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now the Rājarṣī Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see this interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos and beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned into a mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious.

[Ch 12 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He began to think over and over again “what is this? How has this come to pass?” and became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus: “What am I to do now?
NEW CORR ENG ──► He began to think over and over again “What is this? How has this come to pass?” and became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus :--“What am I to do now?

[Ch 12 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How can I in this woman condition go back to my house and how shall I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived me thus!". སྐྱོབ་ཆུལ་
NEW CORR ENG ──► How can I in this woman condition go back to my house and how shall I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived me thus!”

[Ch 12 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these astounding words of Süta, the Rsis said: "O Süta! You have mentioned that king Sudyumna equal to god has been turned into a woman; this is very strange, indeed!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these astounding words of Sūta, the Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sūta! You have mentioned that the king Sudyumna equal to god has been turned into a woman; this is very strange indeed!

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the reason of his being turned into a mare? Kindly describe fully what that beautiful king did in the forest ?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the reason of his being turned into a mare? Kindly describe fully what that beautiful king did in the forest?”

[Ch 12 Verse 16-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Once upon a time, Śaṅaka and other Rṣis went to this forest to pay a visit to Śaṅkara, illuminating the ten quarters by their holy aura. But then Bhagavān Śaṅkara was in amorous dealing with Śaṅkari. The beautiful Devi Ambikā was then naked and sitting on the lap of Śaṅkara and therefore became very much ashamed at their sight; She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained there shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Rṣis, also, seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly to the hermitage of Nara Nārāyaṇa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta, said :-- Once on a time, Sanaka and other Ṛṣis went to this forest to pay a visit to Śaṅkara, illuminating the ten quarters by their holy aura. But then Bhagavān Śaṅkara was in amorous dealings with Śaṅkarī. The beautiful Devī Ambikā was then naked and sitting on the lap of Śaṅkara and therefore became very much ashamed at their sight; She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained there shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Ṛṣis, also, seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly to the hermitage of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

[Ch 12 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Then Bhagavān Śankara, seeing Śankari too much sensitive, said: "Why are you so much bashful and shy?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Bhagavān Śaṅkara, seeing Śaṅkari too much sensitive, said :-- “Why are you so much bashful and shy?

[Ch 12 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am doing just now what will give you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from today and hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be instantly converted into a woman."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am doing just now what will give you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from to-day and hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be instantly converted into a woman.”

[Ch 12 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Munis! Though the forest gave all delights to all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of this curse, carefully avoid the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Munis! Though the forest gave all delights to all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of this curse, carefully avoid the forest.

[Ch 12 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sooner did the King Sudyumna enter into the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well his attendants, were instantly turned into women; there could be no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sooner did the King Sudyumna enter into the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well as his attendants, were instantly turned into women; there could be no doubt in this.

[Ch 12 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king became overpowered with great care and anxiety and did not go back, out of shame, to his palace; but he began to wander to and fro on the outskirts of that forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king became overpowered with great care and anxiety and did not go back, out of shame, to his palace; but he began to wander to and fro on the outer skirts of that forest.

[Ch 12 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He became known afterwards as woman Ila. Now, once, on an occasion, Budha, while he was wandering at his will, came up there and seeing the beautiful Ila with her gestures and amidst the pastures surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; and Ila, too, seeing the beautiful Budha, the son of Candra Deva, became desirous to have him as her husband. They became so very much tied in love towards each other, that intercourse took place there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He became known afterwards as the woman Ilā. Now, once on an occasion, Budh, while he was wandering at his will, came up there and seeing the beautiful Ilā with gestures and pastures and surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; and Ilā, too, seeing the beautiful Budh, the son of Candra deva, became desirous to have him as her husband. They became so very much tied in love towards each other, that intercourse took place there.

[Ch 12 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Bhagavān Budha generated, in the womb of Ila, Purāravā; and Ila gave birth, in due time, to son Puruvāvā in that forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Bhagavān Budh generated, in the womb of Ilā, Pururavā; and Ilā gave birth, in due time, the son Pururavā in that forest.

[Ch 12 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She then, with an anxious heart, recollected, while in the forest, her (rather his), family priest Vasistha Deva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She then, with an anxious heart, recollected, while in the forest, her (rather his), family priest Vaṣiṣṭha Deva.

[Ch 12 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now then Vasisṭha Deva, seeing the distressed condition of king Sudyumna became affected with pity and pleased Mahādeva, Śaṅkara, the most auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now then Vaṣiṣṭha Deva, seeing the distressed condition of the king Sudyumna became affected with pity and pleased Mahādeva, Śaṅkara, the most auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises.

[Ch 12 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Bhagavān Śaṅkara wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Vasiṣṭha Deva wanted that king would be turned again into man as before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Bhagavān Śaṅkara wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Vaṣiṣṭha Deva wanted that the king would be turned again into man as before.

[Ch 12 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Bhagavān Śankara said, in recognition of His promise, that the king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the second month a woman and so on.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Bhagavān Śaṅkara said, in recognition of His promise, that the king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the second month a woman and so on.

[Ch 12 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, by the favor of Vasiṣṭha Deva, king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom and began to govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he used to remain in the interior, and when he used to become a man, he governed his kingdom. At this the subject became very anxious and did not welcome the king as they used to do before. Some days passed away in this way when the prince Purāvraā grew up into manhood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, by the favour of Vaṣiṣṭha Deva, the king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom and began to govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he used to remain in the interior, and when he used to become a man, he governed his kingdom. At this the subjects became very anxious and did not welcome the king as they used to do before. Some days passed away in this way when the prince Pururavā grew up into manhood.

[Ch 12 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then king Sudyumna gave over to him the kingdom and made him the king of the new capital named Pratishān; and started out to an hermitage to perform tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► the king Sudyumna gave over to him the kingdom and made him the king of the new capital named Pratiṣṭhān; and started out to an hermitage to perform tapasyā.

[Ch 12 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He went to a beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and got from the Devarsī Nārada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavatī Devī, consisting of nine letters.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He went to a beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and got from the Devarṣi Nārada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavatī Devī, consisting of nine letters.

[Ch 12 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He began to repeat it incessantly, with heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the all-auspicious Devi Bhagavatī, the Saviour of the whole Universe, became pleased with king and appeared before the king, assuming the divine beautiful form, composed of attributes, intoxicated with the drink, and with eyes rolling with pride, and riding on vāhana, the lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He began to repeat it incessantly, with an heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the all-auspicious Devī Bhagavatī, the Saviour of the whole Universe, became pleased with the king and appeared before the king, assuming the divine beautiful form, composed of attributes, intoxicated with the drink, and with eyes rolling with pride, and riding on vāhana, the lion.

[Ch 12 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing this divine form of the Mother of the Universe, the king Ilā (in this form) bowed down before Her with eyes filled with love and gladly praised Her with hymns thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing this divine form of the Mother of the Universe, the king Ilā (in this form) bowed down before Her with eyes filled with love and gladly praised Her with hymns thus :--

[Ch 12 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Bhagavatī! What a fortunate being I am! That I have seen today the extraordinary world renowned benignant form of Thine granting grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore, bow down to Thy lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served by the whole host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this earth, who can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis get bewildered in trying to know of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Bhagavatī! What a fortunate being I am! That I have seen today the extraordinary world renowned benignant form of Thine granting grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore, bow down to Thy lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served by the whole host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this earth, who can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis get bewildered in trying to know of them.

[Ch 12 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy compassion towards the destructsed and poor and helpless people. How can a human being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend Thy attributes when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Candra (moon), Pavana (wind), Sūrya, Kubcra, and the eight Vasus know not Thy powers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy compassion towards the distressed and poor and helpless people. How can a human being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend Thy attributes when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Candra (moon), Pavana (wind), Sūrya, Kuvera, and the eight Vasus know not Thy powers.

[Ch 12 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled brilliance, knows Thee as a part of Thine only, as Kamalā of Sattva Gunas and giving one all one's desires; Bhagavān Brahmā knows Thy part only as the form made of Rajo Guna and Bhagavān Śaṅkara knows Thee as Umā only made of Tamo Guna; but, O Mother! none of them knows Thy turiya form, transcending all the Gunas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled brilliancy, knows Thee as a part of Thine only, as Kamalā of Sattva Guṇas and giving one all one’s desires; Bhagavān Brahmā knows Thy part only as the form made of Rajo guṇa and Bhagavān Śaṅkara knows Thee as Umā only made of Tamo Guṇa; but, O Mother! none of them knows Thy turīya form, transcending all the Guṇas.

[Ch 12 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and powcrless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly beyond expectation. Therefore, O Bhavānī! I have come to realise, in particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti towards Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and powerless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly beyond expectation. Therefore, O Bhavāni! I have come to realise, in particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti towards Thee.

[Ch 12 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that Bhagavān Madhusūdana Vīsṇu, though married to Kamalā, born from only a part of Thine, considers Himself unfit for Her and is, therefore not happy; then the fact that He, the Ādi-Puruṣa gets his feet champooed by Kamalā merely corroborates the fact that He wants His feet to become pure and all auspicious to the world by the holy touch of Kamalā's hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that Bhagavān Madhusūdan Viṣṇu, though married to Kamalā, born from only a part of Thine, considers Himself unfit of Her and is therefore not happy; then the fact that He, the Ādi Puruṣa gets his feet shampooed by Kamalā merely corroborates the fact that He wants His feet to become pure and all auspicious to the world by the holy touch of Kamalā’s hands.

[Ch 12 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient Purusa Bhagavān Viṣṇu wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like Aśoka tree, for his own improvement and pleasure; and, therefore it is that Thou dost want, as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat with one's legs) Thy husband, stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and worshipped by all the Devas, who lies prostrate below Thy feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient Puruṣa Bhagavān Viṣṇu wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like Aśoka tree, for his own improvement and pleasure; and therefore it is that Thou dost want, as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat with one’s legs) Thy husband, stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and worshipped by all the Devas, who lies prostrate below Thy feet.

[Ch 12 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi, when Thou always resided on the calm broad chest, as if on a great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavān Visnu, as lightning in deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming the Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vāhana (vehicle) (on account of carrying Thee on His breast).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī; when Thou always residest on the calm broad chest, as if on a great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavān Viṣṇu, as lightning in deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming the Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vāhan (vehicle) (on account of carrying Thee on His breast),

[Ch 12 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! If Thou forsakest Madhusūdana, out of wrath, He becomes at once powerless and is not worshipped by anybody; for it is seen everywhere that persons, though calm and serene, if devoid of Śrī (wealth and power) are forsaken by their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! If Thou forsakest Madhusūdana, out of wrath, He becomes at once powerless and is not worshipped by any body; for it is seen everywhere that persons, though calm and serene, if devoid of Śrī (wealth and power) are forsaken by their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities.

[Ch 12 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! I am not to be ignored by Thee, on account of my being a woman, for was it not the fact, that Brahmā and the other Devas who always take shelter of Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once youthful feminine forms, while in Manjdivpa, and I know this surely that Thou again didst make them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou of unbounded power! What shall I describe about Thy power? Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind whether Thou are masculine or feminine?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! I am not to be ignored by Thee, on account of my being a woman, for was it not the fact, that Brahmā and the other Devas who always take shelter of Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once youthful feminine forms, while in Manidvīpa, and I know this surely that Thou again didst make them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou of unbounded power! What shall I describe about Thy power? Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind whether Thou art masculine or feminine?

[Ch 12 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! Whoever Thou mayst be, whether with attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or female, I always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards Thee. O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching devotion, towards Thee in my final state.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! Whoever Thou mayst be, whether with attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or female, I always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards Thee. O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching

[Ch 12 Verse 52-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “Thus praising the Devi, king Sudyunna, in the form of the feminine Ila, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devi, becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union with Her own Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so very rare even to the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the Devi Brahmanayī. Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Purūravaḥ, in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus praising the Devī, the king Sudyumna, in the form of the feminine Ilā, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devī, becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union with Her own Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so very rare even to the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the Devī Brahmāmayī. Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the first Skandha on the birth of Pururavā, in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyās.
