CHAPTER XII

On the Birth of Purvāravā

सूत उवाच

ततः पुरत्वा जते इतायां कथयामि वः ।

ब्रधुपुज्ञसित्यर्मत्या यजकृहानत्परः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: “O Maharsis! The son of the above mentioned Budha is the greatly religious Purūravā, of a very charitable disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born of a kṣatriya woman named Ila; and I will now describe how this Purūravā was born of Ila and Budha—kindly listen.

सुधुने नाम भृपाल सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रियः ।

सैपवं ह्यमासुहा चचार मृगवां वने ॥ 2 ॥

In days of yore, there was a king named Sadyumna, very truthful and highly capable in keeping his senses under control.

युतः कतिययामार्वैर्शिंग ह्राकरुपडतः ।

धनुराजगवं बद्ध्या वाणसघं तथावृदुम् ॥ 3 ॥

स प्रभसंद्वानोहेषेह हन्यमानो रूकन्युगान् ।

गशांहा सूकारांशेय खड्गांहा गवयांशना ॥ 4 ॥

गरणभानिर्धांशे साम्भरावनतुककुटान् ।

निन्नमेश्यान्यूराजा कुमारवन्मारिश्न । 5 ॥

Once upon a time, wearing beautiful earrings, with extraordinary bow named  \( \overline{A} \) jagab and holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on hunt to a forest, riding on a horse, born of

the country Sindhu, surrounded by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of forest, the king got for this šikār, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, buffalo, young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other animals fit for sacrificial purposes; thus, he went on deep into the interior of the forest.

मेरोर्धस्तले दिख्यं मंदारुद्यगतिज्ञान ।

अशोकलतिकाकीर्णं बकुलैरधवासितम् ॥ 6 ॥

सालैस्तालैस्तमालैश उंपकै: पनसैस्तथा ।

आधै-सिंधियुधैकैது माध्यविपणबधान् ॥ 7 ॥

दारिभैनिरिकेलैकु कदलीखणमिडतम् ।

यूथिकामातलौकुन्दपुयवल्लीसामयातून ॥ 8 ॥

This divine forest was adorned with rows of Mandāra trees and situated at the bottom of Mount Sumeru. Various trees and flowers were spreading the beauty of the forest all around; at places were Aśoka creepers, Vakula, Sāl, Tāl, Tamāl, Campak, Panasa, mangoe, Nīp, Madhūka, pomegranate, cocoanut, Yūthikā, plantain, kunda creeper, and various other trees and flowers; at some other places the bowers formed of Mādhavī creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around.

इसकापरवकालीर्ग कौचकम्यनिर्वादित् ।

भ्रमारलितारां वर्न सर्वसुखावहम् ॥ ९ ॥

There were lakes and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with swans, kārandavas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on their banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds; and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees—humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there.

इद्वा प्रपुतितो राजा सुधुभः सेवकेनैतुः ।

दृश्यामुप्यित्यानीक्ष्य कोकितारावमिषडान्। 10 ॥ प्रविष्ठस्तर राजर्षि: क्लौवमाय क्षणाततः ।

अष्टोपि वब्वा जातर्श्रितावि स भूपतिः ॥ 11 ॥

Now, the Rājarsī Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see his interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos and beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned into a mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious.

किमेदोदिति चित्तार्थियमानः पुनः पुनः ।

दुःखं बहुतरं प्राप्त सुबुर्णने जजवायित्व ॥ 12 ॥

He began to think over and over again “what is this? How has this come to pass?” and became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus: “What am I to do now?

किं करौपि कव यासि गृहं क्षीभावसंगृतः ।

कवं राज्यं कार्ययापि केन वा चंचितो हृहम् ॥ 13 ॥

How can I in this woman condition go back to my house and how shall I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived me thus!".

སྐྱོབ་ཆུལ་

सूताश्यमिदं प्रोक्त त्वया यल्लोमहर्षण ।

सुसूमनः क्षीत्यमाप्रो भूपतिर्वसाधिभः ॥ 14 ॥

Hearing these astounding words of Süta, the Rsis said: "O Süta! You have mentioned that king Sudyumna equal to god has been turned into a woman; this is very strange, indeed!

किं तत्कारपाणचक्षव वने तत्र मनोहरे ।

किं कृतं तेन राजा च विस्तरं वद सुवत् ॥ 15 ॥

Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the reason of his being turned into a mare? Kindly describe fully what that beautiful king did in the forest ?”

सूत उवाच

एक्वा निरिगं रड्यूमय: स्नकादय: ।

दिग्गे वितिमारभासा: कुर्वन्तः समुगामन् ॥ 16 ॥

तर्पिक्ष समये तर शड़रः प्रमद्धयुतः ।

क्रीडासत्ता महादेवी विश्वला कामिनी शिवा ॥ 17 ॥

उस्तंगे संश्यता भर्तूं रममाणा मन्तोरा ।

तात्विलोक्यांविका देवी विश्वला जीडिता भृपणम ॥ 18 ॥

भर्तुक्लासमुत्थाय वक्षमादाय पर्यंधात् ।

लज्जाविष्ठा सितान तत व्येमानातिमानिनि ॥ 19 ॥

ऋषयोरि तयोर्वीक्ष्य प्रसंगं रममाणयोः ।

परिवृत्य ययुस्तर्ण नरनारायणाओम्म ॥ 20 ॥

Sūta said: Once upon a time, Śaṅaka and other Rṣis went to this forest to pay a visit to Śaṅkara, illuminating the ten quarters by their holy aura. But then Bhagavān Śaṅkara was in amorous dealing with Śaṅkari. The beautiful Devi Ambikā was then naked and sitting on the lap of Śaṅkara and therefore became very much ashamed at their sight; She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained there shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Rṣis, also, seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly to the hermitage of Nara Nārāyaṇa.

ह्रीयुतां कामिनी वीक्ष्य प्रोवाच भपवान् हर: ।

कर्थ लज्जातुरासि लं सुखं ते प्रक्रोधायम् ॥ 21 ॥

"Then Bhagavān Śankara, seeing Śankari too much sensitive, said: "Why are you so much bashful and shy?

अर्धप्रपति यो महात्युपान्को प्रिय वरानने ।

वंचं च प्रविश्योदतल वे योगिद्धविष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

I am doing just now what will give you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from today and hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be instantly converted into a woman."

इति शपतं वनं तेन ये जानीत जना: वक्तित् ।

वर्जवंर्गीह ते कामं वनं दोषसमुद्धिन्त ॥ 23 ॥

O Munis! Though the forest gave all delights to all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of this curse, carefully avoid the forest.

सुबुधनस्तु तद्धानानप्रविष्ट सचिवः सह ।

तवैव क्षीत्वामपत्रसै: सहैति न संशय: ॥ 24 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XII

No sooner did the King Sudyumna enter into the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well his attendants, were instantly turned into women; there could be no doubt in this.

चिताचिधः स राजर्दिनं जगाम गृहं डिवा ।

विचार बहितस्माइत्रनेशादितस्ततः ॥ 2 5 ॥

The king became overpowered with great care and anxiety and did not go back, out of shame, to his palace; but he began to wander to and fro on the outskirts of that forest.

इलेति नाम संग्रामं झीवे तेन महात्यना ।

विवरसंतस संग्रामो बुध: सोममुती युवा ॥ 26 ॥

झीभि: परिवृतां तांतु दृष्टवा कांतां मनोरामा ।

हावभावकलायुक्तो चकमे भगवान् युध: ॥ 27 ॥

साधि तं चकमे कांतं बुधे सोमसुतं पतिम् ।

संयोगस्तत्र संज्ञाततरयो प्रेमण परमस्परम् ॥ 28 ॥

He became known afterwards as woman Ila. Now, once, on an occasion, Budha, while he was wandering at his will, came up there and seeing the beautiful Ila with her gestures and amidst the pastures surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; and Ila, too, seeing the beautiful Budha, the son of Candra Deva, became desirous to have him as her husband. They became so very much tied in love towards each other, that intercourse took place there.

स तस्यां जनयामास पुरुर्वसमातजम् ॥ 29 ॥

Thus Bhagavān Budha generated, in the womb of Ila, Purāravā; and Ila gave birth, in due time, to son Puruvāvā in that forest.

सोउप्रसृतु सुत काला चिंताविषहा वने स्थिता ।

संस्मार स्वकुलाचार्य वरिकेषु मुनिसनमम् ॥ 30 ॥

She then, with an anxious heart, recollected, while in the forest, her (rather his), family priest Vasistha Deva.

स ततोरस्य दूर्गा दूर्वा सुबुनस्य कृपापित्वतः ।

अतोषयन्महोदं शंकरं लोकशंकरम् ॥ 31 ॥

Now then Vasisṭha Deva, seeing the distressed condition of king Sudyumna became affected with pity and pleased Mahādeva, Śaṅkara, the most auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises.

तस्मै स भगावान्तुतः प्रदरी वाश्छतं वरम् ।

वसिष्ठः प्रार्थ्यमास पुंस्चं रास्त्र प्रियस्य च ॥ 32 ॥

When Bhagavān Śaṅkara wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Vasiṣṭha Deva wanted that king would be turned again into man as before.

शक्रस्तुं निजां वाचमृतां कुर्वैश्वावा ह ।

मासे पुगांतु भविता भासं क्री भूपितः किल ॥ 33 ॥

At this Bhagavān Śankara said, in recognition of His promise, that the king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the second month a woman and so on.

इर्थ प्रायः वरं राता जगाम स्वगृहं पुन ।

घ्रके राज्यं स धर्मतव सशिस्यायन्युग्रहत् ॥ 34 ॥

क्रीलैं तिच्छित हृद्येषु पुंस्ते राज्यं प्रशासित च ।

प्रजातस्विमस्पृद्धिना नाथवन्तन्द्रशीतिम ॥ 35 ॥

Thus, by the favor of Vasiṣṭha Deva, king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom and began to govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he used to remain in the interior, and when he used to become a man, he governed his kingdom. At this the subject became very anxious and did not welcome the king as they used to do before. Some days passed away in this way when the prince Purāvraā grew up into manhood.

काले तु यौवनं प्राप्त: पुरः पुरुर्वास्तदा ।

प्रतिष्ठं पूर्णतिस्त्वसी दत्ता राज्यं चंवं ययो ॥ 36 ॥

Then king Sudyumna gave over to him the kingdom and made him the king of the new capital named Pratishān; and started out to an hermitage to perform tapasyā.

गत्वा तत्मिन्वने रथे नानादुमसभाकुले ।

नारदान्मन्मासाहा नवाक्षमनुतमम् ॥ 37 ॥

He went to a beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and got from the Devarsī Nārada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavatī Devī, consisting of nine letters.

जजाप मन्नमत्यर्धे प्रभपूर्तिमानस: ।

परितृष्टा तदा देकी सगुणा तारिणी शिवा ॥ 38 ॥

सिंहाकृत्वा स्थिता चाग्रे दिव्यलथा मनोरमा ।

वाक्णीयानसंमता मदायृष्णितलोचना ॥ 39 ॥

He began to repeat it incessantly, with heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the all-auspicious Devi Bhagavatī, the Saviour of the whole Universe, became pleased with king and appeared before the king, assuming the divine beautiful form, composed of attributes, intoxicated with the drink, and with eyes rolling with pride, and riding on vāhana, the lion.

इद्वा तां दिव्यकपां च प्रेमाकुलितलोचनः ।

प्रणम्य शिरसा प्रीला तुलाय जगद्धिककाम्। 4 0 ॥

Seeing this divine form of the Mother of the Universe, the king Ilā (in this form) bowed down before Her with eyes filled with love and gladly praised Her with hymns thus:

इलोवाच

दिव्यं च ते भगवित प्रथितं

स्वकरं पूरं यमा सकललोकहितानुकपूम ।

वंदे त्वद्धिकमलं सुरसंभयेल्य

कामपूं जननि चाधि विमुक्तिचं च ॥ 4 1 ॥

को वेति तेज्य पृथि मर्मतन्त्रिणकर्म

मुह्यिति यज मुनयश सुराङ सर्वे ।

रेध्येमितिवल्लं कृपणे दया च

दूर्वैव देयि सकलं किल विस्तमयो मे ॥ 42 ॥

“O Bhagavatī! What a fortunate being I am! That I have seen today the extraordinary world renowned benignant form of Thine granting grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore, bow down to Thy lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served by the whole host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this earth, who can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis get bewildered in trying to know of them.

गंभूर्वीर: कमलजो मघया रविष्ठ

वित्तेशवाद्विकाण: परवन्ध उसमे: ।

जानंति नैव सर्वसोर्धि हि ते प्रभावं

बुध्येक्शं तव गृणानगुणो मनुष्यः ॥ 43 ॥

O Devi! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy compassion towards the destructsed and poor and helpless people. How can a human

being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend Thy attributes when Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Candra (moon), Pavana (wind), Sūrya, Kubcra, and the eight Vasus know not Thy powers.

जानाति विद्याप्रियतशुतितम्ब साक्षात्चां

सान्चिकीमुदीधजां सकलार्थदां च ।

को गतसर्ग हर उमा किल तामसी त्वां

वेदंचिके न तु पुनः खतु निर्णीणं त्वाम् ॥ 44 ॥

O Mother! Bhagavān Viṣṇu, of unrivalled brilliance, knows Thee as a part of Thine only, as Kamalā of Sattva Gunas and giving one all one's desires; Bhagavān Brahmā knows Thy part only as the form made of Rajo Guna and Bhagavān Śaṅkara knows Thee as Umā only made of Tamo Guna; but, O Mother! none of them knows Thy turiya form, transcending all the Gunas.

ब्वाहां सुमेदासितप्रियमप्रभाव:

क्वायं त्वातिनिपुणो मीय सुप्रसादः ।

जाने भवानि चरितं करणासमेतें

यत्सेवाकांड्य दयसे त्वयी भावयुक्तान् ॥ 4 5 ॥

‘O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and powcrless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly beyond expectation. Therefore, O Bhavānī! I have come to realise, in particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti towards Thee.

ब्रुतस्त्वया हरिसरी यनजेशयापि

नैवाचरत्यपि मूरं मधुमुदन्तः ।

पार्दी तावादिपुस्पः किल पायकेन

कृत्वा कांतीच च कोरा रुष्पी पंचिजी ॥ 46 ॥

O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that Bhagavān Madhusūdana Vīsṇu, though married to Kamalā, born from only a part of Thine, considers Himself unfit for Her and is, therefore not happy; then the fact that He, the Ādi-Puruṣa gets his feet champooed by Kamalā merely corroborates the fact that He wants His feet to become pure and all

Book I Chapter XII

auspicious to the world by the holy touch of Kamalā's hands.

वांछल्यहो हरिरशोक इवातिकामं

पाठहित प्रभृवित: पुरुष: पुराण: ।

तां लं करोषि क्षिता प्रपातं च पादे

दृष्ट्वा पति सकलदेवनुतं स्मरात्मे ॥ 47 ॥

O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient Purusa Bhagavān Viṣṇu wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like Aśoka tree, for his own improvement and pleasure; and, therefore it is that Thou dost want, as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat with one's legs) Thy husband, stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and worshipped by all the Devas, who lies prostrate below Thy feet.

वक्षःस्वये वससि देयि सदैव ततय

पर्यकावसुवारिते विषुलेजनिगते ।

सौद्यानीव सुचने सुविधिषिते च

कि ते न वाहनमसौ जगदीक्षोतेपि ॥ 48 ॥

O Devi, when Thou always resided on the calm broad chest, as if on a great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavān Visnu, as lightning in deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming the Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vāhana (vehicle) (on account of carrying Thee on His breast).

तं चेज्जहासि मधुमुदनमंव

कोपार्वैवार्थिनोरीय स भवेकित्कल शक्तिकहीन: ।

प्रत्यक्षेमेव पुर्वे स्वजनार्थजिति

शान्तं श्रियोज्ञतमताव्यगृतीवियुक्ति ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! If Thou forsakest Madhusūdana, out of wrath, He becomes at once powerless and is not worshipped by anybody; for it is seen everywhere that persons, though calm and serene, if devoid of Śrī (wealth and power) are forsaken by their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities.

ब्रहादय: सुराणा न तु किं युवल्यो

ये त्वतदाम्बुजमहर्निगामाश्रवन्ति ।

मन्ये त्वर्वे विहितः खलु ते पुगांसः ।

किं वर्णायासि तव गत्थिमन्तनार्वीर्यं ॥ 50 ॥

O Mother! I am not to be ignored by Thee, on

account of my being a woman, for was it not the fact, that Brahmā and the other Devas who always take shelter of Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once youthful feminine forms, while in Manjdivpa, and I know this surely that Thou again didst make them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou of unbounded power! What shall I describe about Thy power? Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind whether Thou are masculine or feminine?

तं नपुमात्र च पुमानिति मे चिकल्पो

या कास्तिस देवि सगुणा नन् निर्गुणा या ।

तां नवा नामायि सततं किल भावायुक्तो

वाड़ाधि भक्तिभचतां त्विय मातरंतु ॥ 51 ॥

O Devi! Whoever Thou mayst be, whether with attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or female, I always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards Thee. O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching devotion, towards Thee in my final state.

सूत उवाच

इति स्तुला महीपालो जगाम शरणं तदा ।

परितृषा ददो देदी तन सायुज्यमात्मिन ॥ 52 ॥

सुबुण्नस्तु ततः प्राप वर्ध परमकं स्थितम् ।

तत्या देव्या: प्रसादेन मुनीनामपि दुर्विभम् ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागते प्रवमस्कन्चे सुबुण्नस्तुतिनीम

ब्राद्योरोधयाः ।। 54 ॥

Sūta said: “Thus praising the Devi, king Sudyunna, in the form of the feminine Ila, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devi, becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union with Her own Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so very rare even to the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the Devi Brahmanayī.

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the First Book on the birth of Purūravaḥ, in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

