CHAPTER III

On the Glories of the Rudrāksa Beads

श्रीनारायण उवार

"शूद्रं स्मातं चाचमनं पौराणं वैदिकं तथा ।

ताप्रिके श्रीतामिवायु: पद्विधं शुण्चोदितम् ।

विपभूमताकिणीचं च शूढ़ं च परिकर्पितम् ।

स्मातं पौराणिकं कर्म आचाते वितिपूर्वकम् ।

वैदिकं श्रीतामिवायदि ब्रह्मवमातिपूर्वकम् ।

अस्त्विवादाकं कर्म तांत्रिको वितिपरभ्यते' ।

सूचा चोकारायासिं तिवन्दीयातिक्छखां तथा ।

पुनरायध्य हृदयं बाहू स्कंधी च संस्पृशेत् ॥ १ ॥

क्षुते निर्वीशने चैव दोतोषिक्छे तथाज्ञते ।

पतितानां च संभावे दैक्षिणं अवणं स्पृतेये ॥ २ ॥

Śrī Nārāyana said: O Nārada! There are the six kinds of Ācamana: (1) Śuddha, (2) Smārita, (3) Purānik, (4) Vaidik, (5) Tāntrik and (6) Śrauta. The act of cleaning after evacuating oneself of urine and faeces is known as Śuddha Śauca. After cleaning, the Ācamana, that is performed according to rules, is named as Smārita and Paurānik. In places where the Brahma Yajñā is performed, the Vaidik and Śrauta Ācamanas are done. And where acts e.g. the knowledge of warfare are being executed,

the Tāntrik Ācamana is done. Then he is to remember the Gāyatrī Mantra with Pranava (om) and fasten the lock of hair on the crown of his head, thus controlling all the hindrances (Vighna Bandhanam). Sipping again, he is to touch his heart, two arms, and his two shoulders. As sneezing, spitting, touching the lower lip with teeth, accidentally telling a lie, and taking with a very sinful man, he is to touch his right ear (Where the several Devas reside).

अनिरपाख येद्धा सोम: सूर्यो5लल्णा ।

सर्वे नारद विग्रय कर्णे तिहित्न दक्षिणे ॥ ३ ॥

ततसुं गत्वा नाद्वी प्रातःस्नानं विलोधीयम् ।

समाचरेमुनिश्रि देहसंगुधिद्धतेसे ॥ ४ ॥

अल्यंतमलिनो देहो नवघ्रोंमें लहन् ।

सदास्तले तछधोनय ग्रातःस्नानं विधित्यते ॥ ५ ॥

On the right ear of the Brāhmaṇas reside Fire, Water, the Vedas, the Moon, the Sun, and the Vāyu (wind). Then one is to go to a river or any other reservoir of water, and there to perform one's morning ablutions and to cleanse his body

thoroughly. For the body is always unclean and dirty and various dirts are being excreted out of the nine holes (doors) in the body. The morning bath removes all these impurities.

अभ्याग्यानात्यां यच्च पारं प्रतिश्रहात् ।

सूत्याचरितं पारं मुच्यते स्नातकर्माण १। ६ ।।

अस्नातस्य क्रिया: सर्वा भवति विकल्पा यतः ।

Therefore the morning bath is essentially necessary. The sins that arise from going to those who are not fit for such purposes, from accepting gifts from impure persons or from the practice of any other secret vices all are removed by the morning ablutions.

तस्मात्रातश्रोत्स्तानं नित्यमेव त्रिवे त्रिवे ॥ ७ ॥

दर्थयुक्तश्रोत्स्नानं तथा संध्याभिवदंनम् ।

सप्ताई प्रात्स्नावी संध्यान्त्राविषिधिर्विधि: ॥ 8 ॥

द्विश्राहमन्निन: संनिद्रजः श्रुत्रवामपुन्ता।

Without this bath, no acts bear any fruit. Therefore every day, this morning bath is very necessary. Taking the Kuśa grass in hand, one is to perform one's bath and Sandhyā. If for seven days, the morning ablutions are not taken, and if for three days, the Sandhyās are not performed, if for twelve days, the daily Homas be not performed, the Brāhmaṇas become Śūdras.

अत्यत्वाद्वीमाकालस्य बहुत्वाल्नानकर्शनः ॥ 9 ॥

प्राननं तु तथा सन्याद्वीमकाले विगहितः ।

गायत्र्यास्तु परं नास्ति इह लोके परत्र च ॥ 10 ॥

गार्वांतं जायते यस्मात्रयतीत्यधिधायते ।

प्रणवेन तु संयुक्तां व्याहृतिवसर्वतुलाम ॥ 11 ॥

The time for making the Homa in the morning as very little; therefore lest ablutions be done fully which would take a long time and hence the time for the Homa might elapse, the morning bath should be performed quickly. After the bath the Prânāyāma is to be done. Then the full effects of bath are attained. There is nothing holier in this world or in the next than reciting the Gāyatrī. It saves the singer who sings the Gāyatrī; hence it is called Gāyatrī. वायुं वायौं जयेद्विः प्राणसंयमनयात् ।

ब्राह्मा: श्रुतिसंपत्र: स्वधर्मनितर: सदा ॥ 12 ॥

During the time of Prānāyāma, one must control one's Prāna and Apāna Vāyus i.e., make them equal. The Brāhmin, knowing the Vedas and devoted to his Dharma, must practise Prānāyāma three times with the repetition of Gāyatrī and Pranava and the three Vyārthitis (Om Bhu, Om Bhuvar, Om Svah).

स वैदिकं जपेनंयं लोकिकं न कदाचन ।

गोश्रंग सेपीये यावत् तावदोषां न स स्थितः ॥ 13 ॥

न तारायंतृष्णी पक्षी पितृनेकेतारं शगन् ।

While practising, the muttering of Gāyatī is to be done three times. In Prānāyāma, the Vaidik mantra is to be repeated, never a Laukika Mantra is to be uttered. At the time of Prānāyāma, if any body's mind be not fixed, even for a short while, like a mustard seed on the apex of a cow-born, he cannot save even one hundred and one persons in his father's or in his mother's line.

सभाएँ जपसंयुक्तल्यापी व्यान्यातकः ॥ 14 ॥

स्नानांगतर्णे कृत्वा देवर्धिपितृतोषकम् ।

Prānāyāma is called Sagarbha when performed with the repetition of some mantra; it are called Agarbha when it is done simply with mere meditation, without repeating any mantra. After the bathing, the Tarpānam with its accompaniments, is to be done; i.e. the peace offerings are made with reference to the Devas, the Rṣis, and the Pitrs (whereby we invoke the blessings from the subtle planes where the highsouled persons dwell.)

गुढे वखे परीधाय जलगद्रिहेपगातः ॥ 15 ॥

विष्पृतीधारणं कार्यं रूक्षाणं च धारणम् ।

क्रमायोगेन कर्तैवं सर्वदा जपसाधकः ॥ 16 ॥

रुद्राक्षन्कंदेशे द्रणनारपितान्तमस्ते किंशती द्रे

चट् वट् कर्णप्रदेशे कर्णुलकृते झादण झार्जीव ।

वाढ़ीदौर्दैः कलाधिनंयन्यगुक्ते लेकंकें शिखायां

वक्षस्याधिकं यः कलयति शतकं स स्वयं नीलकंः ॥ 17 ॥

After this, a clean pair of clothes is to be worn and then he should get up and come out of the water. The next things preparatory to practise

Book XI Chapter III

Japam are to wear the Tilaka marks of ashes and to put on the Rudrāksa beads. He who holds thirty-two Rudrāksa beads on his neck, forty on his head, six on each ear (12 on two ears), twenty four beads on two hands (twelve on each hand) thirtytwo beads on two arms (sixteen on each), one bead on each eye and one bead on the hair on the crown, and one hundred and eight beads on the breast, (251 in all) becomes himself Mahā Deva. One is expected to use them as such.

बटुधा स्थर्नि रूस्णं रजतेनाधवा मुने ।

शिखायां धार्यत्रिलं कर्णयोबों समाहितः ॥ 18 ॥

यजोपयौते हृते वा कंठे तुरेधवा नरः ।

श्रीनर्याच्रशेपैण प्रणवेन तथायि च ॥ 19 ॥

O Muni! You can use the Rudrāksas after tieing, stringing together with gold or silver always on your Sīkhā, the tuft of hair on the head or on your ears. On the holy thread, on the hands, on the neck, or on the belly (abdomen) one can keep the Rudrāksa after one has repeated sincerely and with devotion the five lettered mantra of Śiva, or one has repeated the Pranava (Om).

निव्याजबल्या मेघावी क्रहाई धारयेन्मुहा ।

रहाश्रधारणं साक्षाधिक्वज्ञानस्य साधानम् ॥ 20 ॥

रहाश्रं यच्छखायां तत्तातत्वमिति सभेत् ।

कर्णोकभयोबंदून देवं देवीं च भावयेत् ॥ 21 ॥

Holding the Rudrāksa implies that the man has realised the knowledge of Śiva-Tattva. O Brahman! The Rudrāksa bead that is placed on the tuft or on the crown hair represents the Tāra tattva i.e., Om Kāra; the Rudrāksa beads that are held on the two ears are to be thought of as Deva and Devi, (Śiva and Śivā).

यज्ञपेयिते वेदांशु तथा हस्ते विश: सभेत् ।

कंठे सरस्वती देपी पाबकं चापि भावयेत् । 22 ॥

The one hundred and eight Rudrāksa beads on the sacrificial thread are considered as the one hundred and eight Vedas (signifying the Full Knowledge), as sixteen digits of the Moon completed; on the arms, are considered as the Dik

(quarters); on the neck, are considered as the Devi Sarasvatī and Agni (fire).

सर्वांभाणां वर्णानां क्रास्ट्राणां च धारणम् ।

कर्तव्यं मंत्रतः प्रोक्ते पिज्ञानां नान्यवर्णिनम् ॥ 23 ॥

क्रहाश्रापणाद्रुते घबलेव न संशयः ।

प्यश्रविति निशिद्धांश तथा शुण्वतप्रि स्मत् ॥ 24 ॥

निष्प्रतिथि तथा वाणनप्रल्पवर्षि संततम् ।

कुर्वंत्रि सदा गच्छन्सुजन्यि मानवः ॥ 25 ॥

The Rudrāksa beads ought to be taken by men of all colours and castes. The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣaṭtīryas and Vaīsyas should hold them after purifying them with Mantras i.e. knowingly; whereas the Śūdras can take them without any such purification by the Mantras; i.e. unknowingly. By holding or putting on the Rudrāksa beads, persons become the Rudras incarnate in flesh and body. There is no doubt in this.

रहाश्रधारणावेल सर्वधार्ने लिणये ।

अनेने घुक्ते देवेने घुक्ते यनु तथा भवेत् ॥ 26 ॥

पीतं रहेण तत्योतं प्रातं शिवेन तत् ।

रहाश्रधारणे लजा येघामतिन महानुने ॥ 27 ॥

तेषां नांति विमर्षिक: संसाराज्ञकमोदिधिः ।

By this all the sins arising from seeing, hearing, remembering, smelling, eating prohibited things, talking incoherently, doing prohibited things, etc., are entirely removed with the Rudrāksa beads on the body; whatever acts, eating, drinking, smelling, etc., are done, are, as it were, done by Rudra Deva Himself. Of Great Muni! He who feels shame in holding and putting on the Rudrāksa beads, can never be freed from this Samsāra even after the Koti births.

रहस्वधारिणं वृद्धा परिवाई करोति यः ॥ 28 ॥

उत्पत्ती तस्य सांकर्ममल्येवेते विनिश्रयः ।

रहस्वधारणावेह रूत्रे रूत्रतवामानुयात् ॥ 29 ॥

मुनयः सत्यसंकल्या बढ़ा बढ़ाव्यमानतः ।

रहस्वधारणाच्छ्रेषं न किंचिद्यि विहते ॥ 30 ॥

He who blames another person holding Rudrāksa beads has defects in his birth (is a bastard). There is no doubt in this. It is by holding

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

on Rudrāksa that Brahmā has remained steady in His Brahmahood untainted and the Munis have been true to their resolves. So there is no act better and higher than holding the Rudrāksa beads.

हज्जधारणीय भकल्पा वर्ध अध्यं द्वताति यः ।

सर्वेपार्वितिभिनु: शिवलोकं स गच्छति ॥ 31 ॥

हज्जधारणीय शब्दे भोपेयते विमातेः ।

पितृलोकमावान्तोन नात्र क्रावां विचारणा ॥ 32 ॥

He who gives clothing and food to a person holding Rudrāksa beads with devotion is freed of all sins and goes to the Śiva Loka. He who feasts gladly any holder of such beads of the time of Śrāddha, goes undoubtedly to the Pitr Loka.

रुद्धाप्रधानिण: पादौ प्रश्रल्याद्ध: पवेबरः ।

सर्वपर्याविनिभूक्तः शिवलोके महीरते ॥ 33 ॥

हूरं वा कटके वासि सुवर्णं वा द्विजोनमः ।

He who washes the feet of a holder of Rudrāksa and drinks that water, is freed of all sins and resides with honour in the Śiva Loka. If a Brāhmana holds with devotion the Rudrāksa beads with a necklace and gold, he attains the Rudrahood.

रहब्रसहितं भकल्या धारयद्रुतात्मियात् ॥ 34 ॥

रहब्रहें केवलं वायि यत्र कुर्र महामते ।

समघंक वा मंत्रेण रहितं भाववर्जितम् ॥ 35 ॥

योबा को बा नरो भकल्या धारलेल्छज्याडीय वा ।

सर्वेपारविन्दिभूक्तः सम्यग्रानमवाप्नयात् ॥ 36 ॥

अहो कर्रहामहात्मयं मया वर्तु न शक्यते ।

तस्मात्वर्धयवनेन कुयंड्राह्रक्षधारणम् ॥ 37 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागतो एकावराक्कचे संवाचावर्गनै

तृत्तावोउधायाः ॥ 38 ॥

O Intelligent One! Wherever whoever holds with or without faith and devotion the Rudrāksa beads with or without any mantra, is freed of all sins and is entitled to the Tattvajñāna. I am unable to describe fully the greatness of the Rudrāksa beads. In fact, all should by all mean hold the Rudrāksa beads on their bodies.

Note: The Number one hundred and eight (108) signifies the One Hundred and Eight Vedas, the Brahmana, the Source of all Wisdom and Joy.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the glories of the Rudrāksa beads in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgāvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

