CHAPTER X

On the Śiva's Granting Boons

རྟོགས་ཆུ།

सूत पूर्व त्वया प्रोकं व्यासेन्यातितेजसा ।

कृत्वा पुगणमिखलं सुकायाध्यायितं सुभम् ॥ १ ॥

व्यासेन तु तपस्त्वा कथमुत्वातितः शुकः ।

विस्तरं बृहि सकलं चय्वुतं कृष्णातत्क्या ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: O Sūta! You told before, that Vyāsa Deva, of unrivalled spirit, composed all the purānas and taught them to his own son Śuka Deva; but how did Vyāsa Deva, who was incessantly engaged in tapasyā, procreate Śuka? Describe to us in detail what you heard direct from Krṣṇa Dvaippāyana Vyāsa.

सूत उवाच

प्रवृक्ष्यामि युकोल्पितं च्यासात्सल्यवतीसुन्ता ।

यथोतयनः शुकः साक्षाधोनीनां प्रवरो मुनि: ॥ 3 ॥

Sūta said: O Rṣis! Hear how Śuka Deva, the best of the Munis and the foremost of the Yogis, was born of Vyāsa Deva, the Satyavati's son.

मेञ्गुंगे महायये व्यास सत्यवतीसुतः ।

तपश्वारा सेठत्यूं पुत्रार्य कृतनिश्रवः ॥ 4 ॥

On the very beautiful summit of Mount Meru, Vyāsa, son of Satyavati, firmly determined, practised very severe austerities for the attainment of a son.

जपत्रेकाकारं मन्ये वार्वीजं नारदाच्छुतम् ।

ध्यायगरां महामायां पुरकामतपोनिधिधः ॥ 5 ॥

Heaving heard from Nārada, he, the great ascetic, repeated the one syllabled mantra of Vāk and worshipped the Highest Māhāmāyā with the object of getting a son.

अनर्पेमैतसा वायोत्तिहास्य चायायम् ।

वीर्यण समिति: पुत्रो मम भ्यावितिभि स ७ ॥ 6 ॥

He asked, Let a son be born to me as pure and as spirited and powerful as fire, air, earth, and Ākāśa.

अतिहास ताहात्रः शतसंवत्सरं प्रभु ।

आराधयन्महादेवं तथैव च सदाशिवम् ॥ 7 ॥

शफि: सर्वत्र पूर्बेति विचार्यं च पुनः पुनः ।

अशगतो निवहते लोकै शक्तिसुं परिपूजते ॥ 8 ॥

He thought over in his mind that the man possessed of Śakti is worshipped in this world and the man-devoid of Śakti is censured here, and thus came to the conclusion that Śakti is therefore worshipped every where; and, therefore, worshipped. Bhagavān Maheśvara coupled with the auspicious Aḍyā Śakti and spent away one hundred years without any food.

यत्र पवंतभुंगे वै कर्णिकारवनाडुते ।

क्रीक्षिति देवता सर्वे मुनवश्छ तपोरिकाः ॥ 9 ॥

आदित्या वसवो रुघा मनतशाश्रिता तथा ।

वसांति मुनयो यय वे चान्य बढ़ावितमाः ॥ 10 ॥

तत्र हेमनरिः शुंगे संगीतध्यनिनिति ।

तप्रधारा धर्मात्या वासः सत्यवतीसुः ॥ 11 ॥

He began his tapasya on that mountain summit which was ornamented with the garden of Karnikāra, where all the Devas play, and where live the Munis highly ascetic, the Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Marut, the two Āśvins, and the other mindful Āsīs, the knowers of Brahma and where the Kinnaras always resound the air with their songs of music, etc., such a place Vyāsa Deva preferred for his tapasyā.

ततोउस्य तेजसा व्यार्थ निश्रं सर्वे चाचारम् ।

अनिवर्ण जटा जाता पाराशयेथ्य दीपितः ॥ 12 ॥

ततोउस्य तेज आतव्य भवमपरा रथीपितः ।

तुरासाई तदा दूरवा भयत्रसं क्षमातुम् ॥ 13 ॥

उवाच भगवान् रूहो मघवन्तं तथास्थितम् ।

The whole universe was pervaded with the spirit of asceticism of the intelligent Parāśara's son Vyāsa Deva; and the hair of his head were clotted and looked tawny, of the colour of flames. Seeing the fire of his asceticism, Indra, lord of Śacī, became exceedingly terrified.

Book I Chapter X

गंकर उगाच

क्रविभ्रंघा शीतीउस किं दुःखं ते सुरोष्ध ॥ १४ ॥

अभर्षे नैव कर्त्यस्तापसेषु कदाचन ।

तपश्रुति मुनयो जात्या मां शफित्संगुतम् ॥ १५ ॥

न त्वेतेश्टतिभच्छिति तापास: स्वर्वेथि हि ।

इतृक्तवचनः शक्रस्तमुवाच वृष्यजम् ॥ १६ ॥

कस्मातपत्ययित आयासः कोः:वैस्तय मनोगतः ।

Bhagavān Rudra, seeing Indra thus afraid, fatigued and morose, asked him: "O Indra, why do you look so fear-stricken today? O Lord of the Devas! What is the cause of your grief? Never show your jealousy and anger to the ascetics; for the mindful ascetics always practise severe asceticism with a noble object and worship Me, knowing Me to be possessed of the all powerful Śakti; they never want ill of anybody."

शिव उवाच

पाराणार्यैतु पुत्रार्थी तपश्रतिर दुक्षगम् ॥ 17 ॥

पूर्णविर्गतं जातं द्वायम्ब तृतं शुभम् ।

When Bhagavān Rudra said this, Indra asked him: "What is his object?" At this, Śaṅkara said: "For the attainment of a son, Parasāra's son is practising so severe austerities; now one-hundred years is being completed;

सूत उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा वासवं रुजी दयया मुदितानn: ॥ 18 ॥

गत्वा ऋषिसमीयं तु तमुवाच जगदगुरुः ।

उत्तिष्ठ वासवीपुत्र पुस्ते भविता सृष्म: ॥ 19 ॥

सर्वतेजोवयो जानी कौतिलतां तावान्यः ।

अखिलस्य जनस्यात्रय वतलभवने सुतः सदा । 20 ॥

भविष्यति गृणैः पूर्णे: सान्विकेः सत्यविक्मः ।

I will go to him, and give him today the auspicious boon of a son." Thus speaking to Indra, Bhagavān Rudra, the Guru of the world, went to Vyāsa Deva and, with merciful eyes, said: "O sinless Vāsavi's son! Get up; I grant to you the boon, that you will get a scn very fiery, luminous and spirited like the five elements fire, air, earth, water and Ākāśa, the supreme Jñāni, the store of

all, auspicious qualities, of great renown, beloved to all, ornamented with all Sāttvik qualities, truthful and valorous."

सूत उवाच

तदाकर्ष वच: रूल्धगं कृष्ण्यैवान्सतदा ॥ 21 ॥

शूलपाणिं नमस्कृत्य जगामाङ्गप्रमातन ।

स गतास3प्रममेवागु बहुवर्षभातुः ॥ 22 ॥

अश्वसित्तं गृही मंभार्थानि चिकारीवा ।

मंधनं कुवंततस्य चिते चित्तभरस्तद ॥ 23 ॥

Hearing these sweet words of Bhagavān Śulapāni Maharṣī Krṣna Dvaipāyana bowed down to Him and went back to his own hermitage. Tired with the labour of penance for many years, he wanted to kindle fire by rubbing two fuels (Aranjī) with each other. While doing this, the high souled man suddenly began to think strongly in his mind about procreating a son.

प्रादुर्बंभूर सहसा सुतोत्पत्ती महात्मनः ।

मंधानारिभसोयोगानमंधनाच्छ समुद्धतः ॥ 24 ॥

He thought: “Will it be that my son will be born as this fire is produced by the friction of the two churning sticks?

पावकस्य यथा तत्कल्बं मे स्यात्सुखोद्धः ।

पुत्रारिभस्तु व्याख्याता सा ममाढ़ न विद्धते ॥ 25 ॥

I have not got the wife, which the Pundits designate as “Putrārani”, the youthful wife endowed with beauty, born of a noble family, the chaste one I have not got with me.

तरणी रूपसम्यमा कुलोल्या पतितात ।

कर्षे करीमि कान्ता च पादयोः शृंखलासामू ॥ 26 ॥

But the wife, though chaste and fit to beget a son, is undoubtedly a chain to both the legs; so how can I get such a one for my wife?

पुत्रोपाददासक्षं च पातित्वरे सदा स्थितान् ।

पतित्वतार्पि दक्षतार्थि रूपवतयि कामिनी ॥ 27 ॥

सदा बंधनरूपा च सेव्छामुखविधायनि ।

शिवोर्धि पर्वति तिथ्मं कामिनीपागसंयुतः ॥ 28 ॥

This is known to all that a chaste wife, though clever in doing all household duties, beautiful and giving happiness to one's desires, is yet always a

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

sort of bondage. What more than this, that the ever Bhagavān Maheśvara is always under the bondage of woman. How, then, knowing and hearing all these, I can accept this difficult householder's life?

कवं कंपोम्बं चात्र दुर्वटं च गुहाङ्मम ।

एवं चिंतयतस्तस्य घृताची दिख्यक्तिपणि ॥ 29 ॥

While he was thinking thus, the extraordinarily beautiful Apsarā Ghrtāci fell to his sight, close to him in the celestial air.

प्राप्ता दृष्टियं तत्र समीपे गगने स्थिता ।

तं घृष्ट्या चझुलायांगीं समीपस्थां वत्पासगम् ॥ ३० ॥

Though Vyāsa Deva was a Brahmacārī (holding in control the secret power of generation) of a very high order, yet seeing suddenly the agile Apsarā (“a celestial nymph”) coming close to him and looking askance at him, he became soon smitten with the arrows of cupid and feeling himself distressed, began to think what shall I do in this critical moment.

पञ्जाणपरीतांगस्नृपीमासीद्युत्त्रतः ।

चित्तवामास च तता दिकं करोयद्य संकंटे ॥ ३ १ ॥

धर्मस्य पुरतः प्राप्ते कामभावे दुरासते ।

अङ्गीकरोंम यदोनां वंचनार्थमिहागताम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

हंसिथ्यित महात्मानस्तायसा मां तु चिद्धलम् ।

तपस्तप्ता महाघोरं पूर्णवर्षगतं तिह्न । ३ ३ ॥

दूर्वाज्ञप्तां च विवश: कर्थे जातो महातपा: ।

कामं निद्विष भवतु यदि स्यादतुलं सुखम् ॥ ३ ४ ॥

गृहस्थाश्रमसंभृतं सुखदं पुरकामदम् ।

स्वारंद च तथा प्रोक्तं जानिनां मोक्षदं तथा ॥ ३ 5 ॥

न भविष्यति तनूनमनया देयकन्यया ।

नारदाच्च मया पूर्व श्रुतमस्ति कथानकम् ।

यथोर्वंशिगशो राजा परभूतः पुस्त्वतः ॥ 36 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे प्रथमकन्चे

दरमांसध्याः ।। ११ ११ ॥।

Unbearable amorous feelings now have come to me; now if I take this celestial nymph, knowing that Dharma is ewerwhere looking, and woman has come to take away my precious fire of spirit acquired by my tapasyā, then I will be laughed at by the high-souled ascetic Munis, who will think that I have lost my senses altogether. Alas! Why I who have practised for one hundred years the most terrible ascetism, have become so powerless by the mere sight of this Apsarā! The Pundits declare the household life as the source of getting son, one's heart's desire and the source of all happiness; so much so that it leads all the virtuous souls to the pleasures of Heaven, and cr'dains Mokṣa (liberation) to those who are Jñānis; and if I get such unrivalled happiness from this householder's life, I can have this Deva Kanyā (the celestial nymph) though blameable. But again that happiness will not occur to me through her; there is no doubt in this. So how can I take her. I heard from Nārada how, in ancient days, a king name Purūravā, fell under the clutches of Urvaśī and ultimately felt great pain, being defeated by her. Thus ends the Tenth Chapter on Śiva's granting boon in the Mahāpurāṇa Śrimadevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

