CHAPTER XXIII

On Killing the Enemy of Sudarsana

व्यास उवाच

तस्पे गौरवधोज्यान विधाय विधायत्वात ।

वासराशि च घडुजा भोजवामास भक्तितः ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: After paying due respects to his new son-in-law, the king Subāhu cheerfully entertained him for six days with variety of good dishes.

एवं विवाहकार्याणिकृत्वा सर्वाणि पार्थिवः ।

पारिवह्छं प्रद्वलाध्य मन्यस्यान्चितेः सह ॥ 2 ॥

Thus finishing off the marriage ceremony, the king after consulting with his ministers, presented the bridegroom and the bride various jewels and ornaments and other things given naturally on marriage occasions.

तृतीस्तु कथितं श्रुत्वा मार्गसैरोधनं कृतम् ।

बधूव विमना राजा सुवाहुर्मितमुंचितः ॥ 3 ॥

Then the king of Benares, of brilliant splendour, heard from his messengers that the kings had obstructed the way-back of Sudarśana and became very absent minded.

सुर्जन्सत्तोबाच धुगुरं संशितानतः ।

अस्मान्सर्वसंगृत्यं लँ पनिष्यभो हुशणैकता: ॥ 4 ॥

Then Sudarśana, of firm resolve, told his father-in-law “O king! better now give us order that we may depart. We will go without any fear.

भात्राजाक्षம் पुर्णे याना तत समीहिता ।

निवासाय विचारो वे कर्तेव्यः सर्वथा यूच ॥ 5 ॥

O king! First we will halt at the holy hermitage of Bhāradvāja Muni; and next we will, after due considerations, settle where we would go.

नृपेध्यत्र न कतंल्यं भयं किंघित्चरायान्च ।

जगन्माता भावती ने साहाय्ये वे कंकीच्छिति ॥ 6 ॥

O pure one! You need not fear a bit from these kings; the Mother of the Universe, the Bhagavati Bhavānī will surely protect us."

व्यास उवाच

तस्येति मतमाज्ञा जामातुर्नुपसमतः ।

विस्सर्प धर्म दर्शा प्रात्पथे सोर्धि सत्यतः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Hearing thus his son-in-law's orders, the king Subāhu gave him a vast amount of wealth and bade good-byc to him. Sudarśana, too, quickly departed.

बलेन महताविष्टो ययावतु नृपोनमः ।

सूदर्जनी वृतस्तत्र चचाल पथि निर्भयः ॥ 8 ॥

The king Subāhu followed him with a long train of soldiers. Thus Sudarśana went on, in his journey, fearless.

रथे: परितृतः शूर: सदारो रथसंस्थितः ।

गछ्छन्छर्षे सै-व्यानि नृपाणां रघुनन्दः ॥ 9 ॥

The great hero Sudarśana, the descendant of Raghu, with his new consort in the chariot and followed by many other chariots, saw the soldiers of the several kings.

सुबाहुरपि तत्थीक्ष्य त्रिवतिष्टो बभूर ह ।

विविधस त्रिवां चित्ते जगाम शरणं मुदा ॥ 10 ॥

The king Subāhu, seeing them, became anxious. But Sudarāna, gladly took refuge, with his whole heart, of the all-auspicious Goddess Śaṅkari.

जजार्विकाकारं मन्दं कामारामनुतम् ।

निर्भयो वीतशोक्रषु पल्या सह नवोक्या ॥ १ १ ॥

Sudarśana began to recite silently the excellent one word seed mantra of the King of Desires (Kāmarāja) and, out of its power, he and his wife remained in the chariot without any fear and sorrow.

ततः सर्वे महीपाला: कृत्वा कोलाहलं तव।

उद्विता: सैन्यसंयुक्ता हनुकामासु कन्यकम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Then all the kings came there with their soldiers to fight with Sudarśana and to carry away by force the bride. Thus a loud uproar arose.

काशिराजसु तान्यूद्या हेतुकामो बभूव है ।

निवातिरस्तद्धान्थे राघवेण जिगीर्वात ॥ 13 ॥

The king of Benares seeing them wanted to kill them. But Sudarśana, the descent of Raghu, desirous of victory, repeatedly asked him not do so.

तगयि नेयु: शंखाङ्ध धर्मेश्रानकन्दुर्धिधः ।

सुबाहोछ नृपाणं च परमत्यर्जिभतानम् ॥ 14 ॥

Loud arose, then, the uproar, caused by the sounds of conchshells, bheri, and war-drums of the kings on one side and Subāhu on the other, each of the two parties determining to extirpate the other.

शुर्जुन्ति सुसंतृतः स्थितस्तत्र जिघांसया ।

युधाजितल्हायावें मनस्दः प्रवेषूच है ॥ १ ५ ॥

Śatrujit prepared himself for the war to destroy his enemy. Yudhājit came there for his help, equipped with army, etc.

कैविष्चः प्रेष्रकास्तस्य सहानीकैः स्थितास्त्वा ।

युधाविद्याते गत्वा सुर्दनंनपुर्यिषस्तः ॥ 16 ॥

शुविजितेन सहिते हेतुं धानतमानुः ।

परमयं ते वाणीवैस्ततः क्रोधार्मूँतः ॥ 17 ॥

Some warrior kings remained there as witnesses with their soldiers. Then Yudhājit went in front of Sudarśana. His younger brother Śatrujit, too, attended Yudhājit to kill his brother in the battlefield. Then the warriors, overpowered with anger, shot each other with arrows.

संमदः सुमहास्तर संप्रवृत्तः सुमारगीः ।

काश्रिपतिस्तदा तूर्ण सैन्येन बहुना वृत: ॥ 18 ॥

A great encounter then ensued in the battlefield

with sharp arrows. The king of Benares hurriedly advanced there, with a great body of army, to provide relief to his son-in-law.

साहाध्यार्थ जगभागु जानातरमर्निदात्म।

एवं प्रवृते संग्रामे दारणे लोगदर्शे ॥ 19 ॥

Thus when the dreadful war began to grow more and more horrible, the Goddess Bhagavatī suddenly appeared there, mounted on Her lion.

प्रादुर्वधूप सहसा देवी सिंहोपरि सियता ।

नानायुधरा रया वराण्यूर्णाभूषिति ॥ 20 ॥

दिच्यावरपरिधाना मन्दारवक्सुर्मुता ।

तां दृष्ट्या तेज्य भृपाता विस्मयं परं गरता: ॥ 21 ॥

The beauty of Her body was exceedingly lovely; She was adorned with various excellent ornaments and She held weapons. She wore divine clothings and the beautiful Mandāra garland suspended from Her neck up to Her knees. The kings were greatly astonished to see Her. They began to argue “Who is this Lady, mounted on a lion? Whence has She so suddenly come?”

केवे सिंहसामारूडा कुनी वेति समुस्तिता ।

सुर्दर्जनस्तु तां वीक्ष्य सुबाहुपिति चाङबीति ॥ 2 2 ॥

पश्य राजन्हादौबीमानतां दिव्यदर्शनान् ।

अनुग्रहाय मे नूनं प्रापुभृतां द्वावित्वा ॥ 23 ॥

Becholding Her, Sudarśana told the king of Benares “O king! Behold! The Divine Mahā Devi has come here to favour us. She is very merciful. Now I am completely fearless.”

निर्भयोर्भह महाराज जातोरप्रिस निर्भयाद्वीप ।

सुर्दर्जनः सुबाहुक्ष तामालोक्य खराननम् ॥ 24 ॥

Sudarśana and Subāhū were highly delighted to see the Beautiful Goddess and bowed down to Her feet with great devotion.

प्रणामं चक्रतुस्तया मृदितों दर्शनेन च ।

ननाद च तदा सिंहो गजास्तसाठ्यकंपि ॥ 25 ॥

Then the lion, the vehicle of the Goddess, roared, making tremendous noise. Hearing the roaring of the lion, all the elephants trembled. At that time, the winds began to blow violently and the four assumed an awful appearance.

Book III Chapter XXIII

वबुवांता महाश्रोर दिशशासन्सुदारूणा: । सुरूर्गनस्तदा प्राह्र निजं सेनापति प्रति ॥ 26 ॥ मार्गे जत्र तंरसा घृपाला यत्र संस्थिता: ।

किं कारिच्छित राजान: कृपिता दुढ़चेतस: ॥ 27 ॥

Then Sudarśana told his general to carry soon his forces where the king's were staying, blocking his way. What could the vicious kings do now, though they had become very angry? The Goddess Bhagvatī had come there to save us."

शरणार्थ च संप्राणा देही भगवती हि नः ।

नित्रातैक्र श नत्वयं मार्गेत्रिमन्यूपरबूर्ते ॥ २ ८ ॥

"Now you all go safely and calmly through the midst of the kings. See! At my remembering Her, She has come here mercifully to save us."

स्मृता मया महादेवी रक्षणार्थमुपगता ।

तच्छुला वचनं सेनापतिस्तेन चधाजजन् ॥ 29 ॥

युधाजितु सुमेकुळदसानुवाच महीधाने ।

किं स्थिता भयसंजस्ता निर्भन्तु कन्यकान्तिमन्त ॥ 30 ॥

The general, on hearing these words, became ready to march by that route. Then Yudhājit, very much infuriated with anger, said to all the kings: "Why are you all so much fear stricken? Kill this Sudarśana, stealing away this girl.

अवमान्य च नः सर्वान्वलतीनो बलाधिकान् ।

कन्यां गृहीला संयाति निर्भयनस्तराशि शिष्यः ॥ 31 ॥

This lad, weak and without any support, will carry away by force and fearlessly the girl, spitting on all the kings; and won't you be able to do any thing? This is very strange!

क्रि भीता: कामिनीं बीक्ष्य सिंहोपरि सुसंशित्यान् ।

नोपेक्ष्यो हि महाभागा हंतलोत्र समाहिते: ॥ 32 ॥

Are you afraid to see this one lady on a lion? O high minded kings! Never trifle away this boy; kill him with all attention."

हृलैनं संगृहीधाम कन्यां चाकविष्यपाणम् ।

नायं केसिरिणा5दत्तां छेतुर्महैति जंकुः ॥ 33 ॥

Killing him, we will then take away this girl. The jackal can never snatch away the lady under the grasp of a lion."

इत्युक्त्वा सैन्यसिंगुक्तः शनुक्तिवसहितस्तदा ।

योदुकामः सुसंप्राणो युधाजित्कोधसंवृतः ॥ 34 ॥

Thus saying, the king Yudhajit, filled with anger, came to the battle field with Satrujit and all his forces.

मुपाव विशिषास्तूर्ण सम्पुखात्रिक्लाशितान् ।

धनुताकृष्य कर्णानं कर्मार्विर्माजित्रान् ॥ 35 ॥

हैतुकामः सुदुर्भेधा सुदर्शनमधोपरि ।

मुर्दानस्तु तान्बाणीश्छ्छेद्वापततः क्षणान् ॥ 36 ॥

That wicked king, drew his bow string well nigh to his ear and shot arrows after arrows, sharpened under stone and by blacksmith at Sudarśana, with the object of killing him. Sudarśana cut off all those arrows quickly with his own quick going arrows.

एवं युद्धे प्रवृतेश्व चुकोप चधिडका भृगम् ।

दुगोंदौबी मुभोचाथ वाणान् युधावित्र पति ॥ 37 ॥

Thus when the fight grew intense, the Goddess Candikā became very much enraged and shot arrows at Yudhājit.

नानाक्या तदा जाता नानाशक्षरा शिवा ।

सम्पाता तुमुलं तन चकार जार्थिकव ।। 38 ॥

शुर्जविज्ञहतस्तत्र युधाजदिप पार्थिवः ।

पतिती ती रथाथ्यां तुं जयग्वहस्तत्रप्रभन्त ।। 39 ॥

Assuming diverse forms, the Goddess Durgā, holding various weapons, the auspicious Mother of the Universe, began to fight terribly in the battle field. Śatrujit and the King Yudhājit were killed in that terrible battle. Both of them fell dead from their chariots; and a shout of victory arose from the side of Sudarśana.

विसयं परमं प्राता घपूः सर्वे वित्तेक्य ताम् ।

निधनं मातुलस्वामि भागिनेवस्य संयुगे ॥ 40 ॥

The uncle and cousin of the king Subāhu were on the side of Yudhajit and were killed. The kings were very much astonished to see them thus lying dead.

सुबाहुरीय पतदृष्टवा निधनं संयुगे तयोः ।

तुषाव परमप्रीते दुर्गा दुर्गार्तिनिगीम् ॥ 41 ॥

The king. Subāhu, seeing them dead in the battlefield became very glad and began to praise and sing hymns in honour of Durgā Devi, the Destroyer of all difficulties.

Širmuddevibhāgavatam

सुवाहुर्वाच

नयी देखे जगद्धान्ये शिवाये सततं नयः ।

दुर्गार्थ भगवल्ये ते कामदाये नमो : ॥ 4 2॥

नम: शिवाये शगलै ते विद्याये मोख्ये दनः ।

विश्वायादपै जगमातर्जगढ्ध्यो नम शिवशे : च ॥ 4 3॥

I bow to the auspicious Goddess Jagaddhātri, again and again; I bow to the Bhagavatī Durga the bestower of all desires; I always bow down to Her Who is auspicious, peace giving, and the Higher Vidyā. O Mother! O Giver of salvation! O Auspicious One! You are pervading the whole Universe, O World Mother! and Upholder of the Universe! I bow down to Thee.

नाहं गर्ति तत चिया परिचिन्तयन् वै

ज्ञानामि देख सगुण: क्रिल निर्गुणाना: ।

कि स्तीति विश्वजन्नी प्रकटप्रभावां

भक्तान्तिनागनरां परमां च शक्तिन् ॥ 44 ॥

O World-mother! O Devi! you are devoid of Prākṛtic qualities; you are full of qualities; beyond mind and speech; one cannot think out your prowess, etc., by one's mind. Mother! you are the Highest Force; ever willing to destroy the miseries of your devoted persons. Your influence is manifest everywhere; what eulogy can I sing of Thee.

वार्देवता त्वमिस सर्वांगैतैव

ब्रुद्धिवामितिह गतिर्ययिस सर्वंजतेः ।

त्वां स्तीय किं त्वमिस सर्वमानीरयंत्री

कि स्तूयते हि सततं खतु चात्मकाप् ॥ 45 ॥

O Devi! You are the Goddess of Våk (speech) of all beings; you are the all pervading intelligence, mind, effort, and movements; you are the controller of the minds of all; therefore how can I praise You? O Goddess; You are the Self of all; how can I sing eulogies to You, who are beyond speech and mind, and to the Universal Self.

बहा हर्ष ईर्ष हरियर्फिंग सुवनो

नाते नाता: सुरवा: किल ते गुणानम् ।

वर्गहं विषेर्मातिरंव गुणैवृत्तो वै

वर्तुः क्षमसत्व चरित्रमहोउप्रसिद्धः ॥ 46 ॥

Brahmā, Hari and Hara and other higher Devas

have not been able to find the limits of your qualities, though they are incessantly chanting your praises; O Goddess! I am the small of the smallest, I am without qualification, and bound by Prākṛtic qualities; I am ignorant as regards Jiva and Brahma. O Mother! I will never be able to describe Your characteristics that are unfathomable.

सस्तुङ़ितः कथमहो न कीति कामं

प्रासङ्क्रिपि विहिता खलु चिन्तगूढ़ि: ।

जामातुर्व स्थितितेन समागानेन

ग्रालं मायाउतुमिदं तव दर्शनं चे ॥ 47 ॥

O Mother! Why not good companionships effects the fulfilment of one's desires. The purification of my heart has been effected incidentally. O Mother! my son-in-law is wholly devoted to you; accidentally there has arisen the connection between him and me and it is on account of his connection that I have been able to see you.

ब्रह्मास्थि वांछिति सदैव हरो हरिश

सेंद्रा: सुगक्ष मुनयो विदितार्थतच्चा: ।

यर्शर्नें जनर्नि तेजदा मया दुर्गर

प्राणं विना दमगामदिसमाधिर्यिष्ठ ॥ 48 ॥

O Mother! Today I have got without any restraint and control of passions, and samādhi, the rare vision of You, who is wanted to be seen even by Brahmā, Hari and Hara, Indra and the other Devas and by the Munis, who have attained their realisation. Therefore who is there in this Triloki, that is so fortunate as I am.

क्वाहं सुमंदमितिणु त्वावलोकें

क्वेदं घवापिन भवधेघजमहितीयम् ।

ज्ञातपत्र देवि सन्ति कित

भावयुक्ता भक्तावृकनवरासमध्यानुखा ॥ 49 ॥

O Bhavānī! Where am I, void of intelligence and where is the rare vision of You, Who is the only medicine of this disease of the ocean of world? Still, O Mother! Who is worshipped by this Devas, I have got Your vision. Now I have come to know that You always shew mercy to Your Bhaktas, who are in their Bhāvas (mental images of your Self).

Book III Chapter XXIV

फिंक वर्णायामि तव देवि चरित्रमेताङ-

प्रक्षितोर्जित विषयेत्र सुर्गनीनोद्यम् ।

शत्रु हर्ती सुबलिनो तत्सा त्वयाउऊ

भक्तानुकंपि चरितं परमं पवित्रम् ॥ 50 ॥

O Goddess! You have saved Sudarśana in this great war crisis and You have slain these two powerful enemies. How can I describe your prowess in this matter? This I have understood that Your Holy Character ever shews mercy on Your devotees.

नात्यप्रेमोर्दिति देख विचारितेर्दे

तं पासि सर्वमिच्छलि स्थिरजंगमां दे ।

ग्रात्स्वया च विवितूल्य तिपुरद्वातः

संरक्षितोप्रयमधुना धुवसंदिस्युतः ॥ 51 ॥

O Goddess! Again this is not a matter to be wondered at, if one considers; for You are protecting this whole universe, moving and unmoving; and accordingly You have now protected, out of Your mercy, your Bhakta Sudarśana, the son of Dhruvasandhi, by killing his enemy.

भक्तस्य सेवनपरं स्वयंगोस्तितीपतं

कर्तू भवानि रचितं चरितं त्वयितत् ।

नोचेकक्षं सुविर्यहा सुतां वदीयां

युढे भवेकुशलवाननवहणीलः ॥ 52 ॥

O Bhavānī! It is not merely for the protection of your Bhaktas, engaged in Your service, that You shew this favour but also to extol the meritorious deeds of your Bhaktas that You do such things; otherwise how is it that this Bhakta saint like Sudarśana, by marrying my daughter, has got victory in this battle field?

शक्तास्त्रि जन्ममरणादिभ्यावित्वहंतु

किं चित्रमत्र किल भक्तजनस्य कामम् ।

त्वं गीयसे जननि भक्तजनैरपारा त्वं

पांपुष्यरहिता सगुणगरुणा च ॥ ५३ ॥

O Mother! You are fully capable to destroy the fear of birth and death. What wonder is there that you fulfill the desires of your Bhakta? The Bhaktas extol You by characterising You as Saguna (full of qualities), Nirguna (devoid of any quality) and Apārā, beyong all merits and demerits.

त्वहर्णनादहमहो सुकृती कृतार्थों

जातोउमि देव विष्नेश्रि ध्यन्त्रना ।

बीजे न ते न भवनं कित वेधि

माताज्ञतिवताए महिमा प्रकटप्रभाव: ॥ 54 ॥

O Goddess! O Bhuvanesvari! I am fortunate that I have been able to see You, and thus all my duties have become crowned with success. O Mother! I have no practices in the shape of Your meditation, etc. nor do I know any seed mantras of Yours; today I have fully seen Your glory manifested.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता तदा देवी प्रसावद्वना शिवा ।

उवाच च नृपं देवी वरं वरय सूतत ॥ 55 ॥

इति श्रीवेदौभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्ने जयोविंशोउथाय: ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus extolled by the king Subāhu, the Goddess Bhagavatī, the Bestower of the Absolute Freedom, was pleased and said: "O thou, practice of good vows! Ask boon from Me."

Thus ends the Twenty third Chapter on the killing of

the enemy of Sudarśana in the great war, in

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XXIV

