[Ch 23 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: After paying due respects to his new son-in-law, the king Subāhu cheerfully entertained him for six days with variety of good dishes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- After paying due respects to his new son-in-law, the king Subāhu cheerfully entertained him for six days with variety of good dishes.

[Ch 23 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus finishing off the marriage ceremony, the king after consulting with his ministers, presented the bridegroom and the bride various jewels and ornaments and other things given naturally on marriage occasions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus finishing off the marriage ceremony, the king after consulting with his ministers, presented the bridegroom and the bride various jewels and ornaments and other things given naturally on marriage occasions.

[Ch 23 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the king of Benares, of brilliant splendour, heard from his messengers that the kings had obstructed the way-back of Sudarśana and became very absent minded.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the king of Benares, of brilliant splendour, heard from his messengers that the kings had obstructed the way back of Sudarśana and became very absent minded.

[Ch 23 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Sudarśana, of firm resolve, told his father-in-law “O king! better now give us order that we may depart. We will go without any fear.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Sudarśana, of firm resolve, told his father-in-law “O king! better now give us order that we may depart. We will go without any fear.

[Ch 23 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! First we will halt at the holy hermitage of Bhāradvāja Muni; and next we will, after due considerations, settle where we would go.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! First we will halt at the holy hermitage of Bhāradvāja Muni; and next we will, after due considerations, settle where we would go.

[Ch 23 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O pure one! You need not fear a bit from these kings; the Mother of the Universe, the Bhagavati Bhavānī will surely protect us."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O pure one! You need not fear a bit from these kings; the Mother of the Universe, the Bhagavatī Bhavānī will surely protect us.”

[Ch 23 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Hearing thus his son-in-law's orders, the king Subāhu gave him a vast amount of wealth and bade good-byc to him. Sudarśana, too, quickly departed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king Janamejaya! Hearing thus his son-in-law’s orders, the king Subāhu gave him a vast amount of wealth and bade good-bye to him. Sudarśana, too, quickly departed.

[Ch 23 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king Subāhu followed him with a long train of soldiers. Thus Sudarśana went on, in his journey, fearless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king Subāhu followed him with a Iong train of soldiers. Thus Sudarśana went on, in his journey, fearless.

[Ch 23 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The great hero Sudarśana, the descendant of Raghu, with his new consort in the chariot and followed by many other chariots, saw the soldiers of the several kings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The great hero Sudarśana, the descendant of Raghu, with his new consort in the chariot and followed by many other chariots, saw the soldiers of the several kings.

[Ch 23 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king Subāhu, seeing them, became anxious. But Sudarāna, gladly took refuge, with his whole heart, of the all-auspicious Goddess Śaṅkari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king Subāhu, seeing them, became anxious. But Sudarśana, gladly took refuge, with his whole heart, of the all-auspicious Goddess Śaṅkarī.

[Ch 23 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana began to recite silently the excellent one word seed mantra of the King of Desires (Kāmarāja) and, out of its power, he and his wife remained in the chariot without any fear and sorrow.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana began to recite silently the excellent one word seed mantra of the King of Desires (Kāmarāja) and, out of its power, he and his wife remained in the chariot without any fear and sorrow.

[Ch 23 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then all the kings came there with their soldiers to fight with Sudarśana and to carry away by force the bride. Thus a loud uproar arose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then all the kings came there with their soldiers to fight with Sudarśana and to carry away by force the bride. Thus a loud uproar arose.

[Ch 23 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king of Benares seeing them wanted to kill them. But Sudarśana, the descent of Raghu, desirous of victory, repeatedly asked him not do so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king of Benares seeing them wanted to kill them. But Sudarśana, the descent of Raghu, desirous of victory, repeatedly asked him not do so.

[Ch 23 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Loud arose, then, the uproar, caused by the sounds of conchshells, bheri, and war-drums of the kings on one side and Subāhu on the other, each of the two parties determining to extirpate the other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Loud arose, then, the uproar, caused by the sounds of conchshells, bherri, and war drums of the kings on one side and Subāhu on the other, each of the two parties determining to extirpate the other.

[Ch 23 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śatrujit prepared himself for the war to destroy his enemy. Yudhājit came there for his help, equipped with army, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śatrujit prepared himself for the war to destroy his enemy. Yudhājit came there for his help, well equipped with army, etc.

[Ch 23 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some warrior kings remained there as witnesses with their soldiers. Then Yudhājit went in front of Sudarśana. His younger brother Śatrujit, too, attended Yudhājit to kill his brother in the battlefield. Then the warriors, overpowered with anger, shot each other with arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some warrior kings remained there as witnesses with their soldiers. Then Yudhājit went in front of Sudarśana. His younger brother Śatrujit, too, attended Yudhājit to kill his brother in the battle field. Then the warriors, overpowered with anger, shot each other with arrows.

[Ch 23 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A great encounter then ensued in the battlefield with sharp arrows. The king of Benares hurriedly advanced there, with a great body of army, to provide relief to his son-in-law.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A great encounter then ensued in the battle field with sharp arrows. The king of Benares hurriedly advanced there, with a great body of army, to relieve his son-in-law.

[Ch 23 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when the dreadful war began to grow more and more horrible, the Goddess Bhagavatī suddenly appeared there, mounted on Her lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when the dreadful war began to grow more and more horrible, the Goddess Bhagavatī suddenly appeared there, mounted on Her lion.

[Ch 23 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beauty of Her body was exceedingly lovely; She was adorned with various excellent ornaments and She held weapons. She wore divine clothings and the beautiful Mandāra garland suspended from Her neck up to Her knees. The kings were greatly astonished to see Her. They began to argue “Who is this Lady, mounted on a lion? Whence has She so suddenly come?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beauty of Her body was exceedingly lovely; She was adorned with various excellent ornaments and She held various weapons. She wore divine clothings and the beautiful Mandāra garland suspended from Her neck up to Her knees. The kings were greatly astonished to see Her. They began to argue “Who in this Lady, mounted on a lion? Whence has She so suddenly come?”

[Ch 23 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Becholding Her, Sudarśana told the king of Benares “O king! Behold! The Divine Mahā Devi has come here to favour us. She is very merciful. Now I am completely fearless.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Beholding Her, Sudarśana told the king of Benares “O king! Behold! The Divine Mahā Devī has come here to favour us. She is very merciful. Now I am completely fearless.”

[Ch 23 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana and Subāhū were highly delighted to see the Beautiful Goddess and bowed down to Her feet with great devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana and Subāhu were highly delighted to see the Beautiful Goddess and bowed down to Her feet with great devotion.

[Ch 23 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the lion, the vehicle of the Goddess, roared, making tremendous noise. Hearing the roaring of the lion, all the elephants trembled. At that time, the winds began to blow violently and the four assumed an awful appearance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the lion, the vehicle of the Goddess, roared, making tremendous noise. Hearing the roaring of the lion, all the elephants trembled. At that time, the winds began to blow violently and the four quarters assumed an awful appearance.

[Ch 23 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Sudarśana told his general to carry soon his forces where the king's were staying, blocking his way. What could the vicious kings do now, though they had become very angry? The Goddess Bhagvatī had come there to save us."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Sudarśana told his general to carry soon his forces where the kings were staying, blocking his way. “What could the vicious kings do now, though they had become very angry? The Goddess Bhagavatī had come there to save us.

[Ch 23 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Now you all go safely and calmly through the midst of the kings. See! At my remembering Her, She has come here mercifully to save us."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now you all go safely and calmly through the midst of the kings. See! At my remembering Her, She has come here mercifully to save us.”

[Ch 23 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The general, on hearing these words, became ready to march by that route. Then Yudhājit, very much infuriated with anger, said to all the kings: "Why are you all so much fear stricken? Kill this Sudarśana, stealing away this girl.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The general, on hearing these words, became ready to march by that route. Then Yudhājit, very much infuriated with anger, said to all the kings :-- “Why are you all so much fear stricken? Kill this Sudarśana, stealing away this girl.

[Ch 23 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This lad, weak and without any support, will carry away by force and fearlessly the girl, spitting on all the kings; and won't you be able to do any thing? This is very strange!
NEW CORR ENG ──► This lad, weak and without any support, will carry away by force and fearlessly the girl, spiting all the kings; and won’t you be able to do anything? This is very strange!

[Ch 23 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Are you afraid to see this one lady on a lion? O high minded kings! Never trifle away this boy; kill him with all attention."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Are you afraid to see this one lady on a lion? O high minded kings! Never trifle away this boy; kill him with all attention.

[Ch 23 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Killing him, we will then take away this girl. The jackal can never snatch away the lady under the grasp of a lion."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Killing him, we will then take away this girl. The jackal can never snatch away the lady under the grasp of a lion.”

[Ch 23 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the king Yudhajit, filled with anger, came to the battle field with Satrujit and all his forces.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the king Yudhājit, filled with anger, came to the battle field with Śatrujit and all his forces.

[Ch 23 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That wicked king, drew his bow string well nigh to his ear and shot arrows after arrows, sharpened under stone and by blacksmith at Sudarśana, with the object of killing him. Sudarśana cut off all those arrows quickly with his own quick going arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That wicked king, drew his bow string well nigh to his ear and shot arrows after arrows, sharpened under stone and by blacksmith at Sudarśana, with the object of killing him. Sudarśana cut off all those arrows quickly with his own quick going arrows.

[Ch 23 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when the fight grew intense, the Goddess Candikā became very much enraged and shot arrows at Yudhājit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when the fight grew intense, the Goddess Candikā became very mach enraged and shot arrows at Yudhājit.

[Ch 23 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Assuming diverse forms, the Goddess Durgā, holding various weapons, the auspicious Mother of the Universe, began to fight terribly in the battle field. Śatrujit and the King Yudhājit were killed in that terrible battle. Both of them fell dead from their chariots; and a shout of victory arose from the side of Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Assuming diverse forms, the Goddess Durgā, holding various weapons the auspicious Mother of the Universe, began to fight terribly in the battle field. 39. Śatrujit and the king Yudhājit were killed in that terrible battle. Both of them fell dead from their chariots; and a shout of victory arose from the side of Sudarśan.

[Ch 23 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The uncle and cousin of the king Subāhu were on the side of Yudhajit and were killed. The kings were very much astonished to see them thus lying dead.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The uncle and cousin of the king Subāhu were on the side of Yudhājit and were killed. The kings were very much astonished to see them thus lying dead.

[Ch 23 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king. Subāhu, seeing them dead in the battlefield became very glad and began to praise and sing hymns in honour of Durgā Devi, the Destroyer of all difficulties. Širmuddevibhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king Subāhu, seeing them dead in the battlefield became very glad and began to praise and sing hymns in honour of Durgā Devī the Destroyer of all difficulties.

[Ch 23 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow to the auspicious Goddess Jagaddhātri, again and again; I bow to the Bhagavatī Durga the bestower of all desires; I always bow down to Her Who is auspicious, peace giving, and the Higher Vidyā. O Mother! O Giver of salvation! O Auspicious One! You are pervading the whole Universe, O World Mother! and Upholder of the Universe! I bow down to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow to the auspicious Goddess Jagaddhātrī, again and again; I bow to the Bhagavatī Durgā the bestower of all desires; I always bow down to Her Who is auspicious, peace giving, and the Higher Vidyā. O Mother! O Giver of salvation! O Auspicious One! You are pervading the whole Universe, O World Mother! and Upholder of the Universe! I bow down to Thee.

[Ch 23 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O World-mother! O Devi! you are devoid of Prākṛtic qualities; you are full of qualities; beyond mind and speech; one cannot think out your prowess, etc., by one's mind. Mother! you are the Highest Force; ever willing to destroy the miseries of your devoted persons. Your influence is manifest everywhere; what eulogy can I sing of Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O World-mother! O Devī! you are devoid of Prākritic qualities; you are full of qualities; beyond mind and speech; one cannot think out your prowess, etc., by one’s mind. Mother! you are the Highest Force; ever willing to destroy the miseries of your devoted persons. Your influence is manifest everywhere; what eulogy can I sing of Thee.

[Ch 23 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devi! You are the Goddess of Våk (speech) of all beings; you are the all pervading intelligence, mind, effort, and movements; you are the controller of the minds of all; therefore how can I praise You? O Goddess; You are the Self of all; how can I sing eulogies to You, who are beyond speech and mind, and to the Universal Self.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devī! You are the Goddess of Vāk (speech) of all beings; you are the all pervading intelligence, mind, effort, and movements; you are the controller of the minds of all; therefore how can I praise You? O Goddess; You are the Self of all; how can I sing eulogies to You, who are beyond speech and mind, and to the Universal Self.

[Ch 23 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Hari and Hara and other higher Devas have not been able to find the limits of your qualities, though they are incessantly chanting your praises; O Goddess! I am the small of the smallest, I am without qualification, and bound by Prākṛtic qualities; I am ignorant as regards Jiva and Brahma. O Mother! I will never be able to describe Your characteristics that are unfathomable.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Hari and Hara and other higher Devas have not been able to find the limits of your qualities, though they are incessantly chanting your praises; O Goddess! I am the small of the smallest, I am without qualification, and bound by Prākritic qualities; I am ignorant as regards Jīva and Brahmā. O Mother! I will never be able to describe Your characteristics that are unfathomable.

[Ch 23 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Why not good companionships effects the fulfilment of one's desires. The purification of my heart has been effected incidentally. O Mother! my son-in-law is wholly devoted to you; accidentally there has arisen the connection between him and me and it is on account of his connection that I have been able to see you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! why not good companionships effect the fulfilment of one’s desires. The purification of my heart has been effected incidentally. O Mother! my son-in-law is wholly devoted to you; accidentally there has arisen the connection between him and me and it is on account of his connection that I have been able to see You.

[Ch 23 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Today I have got without any restraint and control of passions, and samādhi, the rare vision of You, who is wanted to be seen even by Brahmā, Hari and Hara, Indra and the other Devas and by the Munis, who have attained their realisation. Therefore who is there in this Triloki, that is so fortunate as I am.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Today I have got without any restraint and control of passions, and samādhi, the rare vision of You, who is wanted to be seen even by Brahmā, Hari and Hara, Indra and the other Devas and by the Munis, who have attained their realisation. Therefore who is there in this Trilokī, that is so fortunate as I am.

[Ch 23 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! Where am I, void of intelligence and where is the rare vision of You, Who is the only medicine of this disease of the ocean of world? Still, O Mother! Who is worshipped by this Devas, I have got Your vision. Now I have come to know that You always shew mercy to Your Bhaktas, who are in their Bhāvas (mental images of your Self).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! Where am I, void of intelligence and where is the rare vision of You, Who is the only medicine of this disease of the ocean of world? Still, O Mother! Who is worshipped by the Devas, I have got Your vision. Now I have come to know that You always show mercy to Your Bhaktas, who are in their Bhavas (mental images of your Self).

[Ch 23 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! You have saved Sudarśana in this great war crisis and You have slain these two powerful enemies. How can I describe your prowess in this matter? This I have understood that Your Holy Character ever shews mercy on Your devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! You have saved Sudarśan in this great war crisis and You have slain these two powerful enemies. How can I describe your prowess in this matter? This I have understood that Your Holy Character ever shows mercy on Your devotees.

[Ch 23 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! Again this is not a matter to be wondered at, if one considers; for You are protecting this whole universe, moving and unmoving; and accordingly You have now protected, out of Your mercy, your Bhakta Sudarśana, the son of Dhruvasandhi, by killing his enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! Again this is not a matter to be wondered at, if one considers; for You are protecting this whole universe, moving and unmoving; and accordingly You have now protected, out of Your mercy, your Bhakta Sudarśana, the son of Dhruvasandhi, by killing his enemy.

[Ch 23 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! It is not merely for the protection of your Bhaktas, engaged in Your service, that You shew this favour but also to extol the meritorious deeds of your Bhaktas that You do such things; otherwise how is it that this Bhakta saint like Sudarśana, by marrying my daughter, has got victory in this battle field?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bhavānī! It is not merely for the protection of your Bhaktas, engaged in Your service, that You shew this favour but also to extol the meritorious deeds of your Bhaktas that You do such things; otherwise how is it that this Bhakta saintlike Sudarśana, by marrying my daughter, has got victory in this battle field?

[Ch 23 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! You are fully capable to destroy the fear of birth and death. What wonder is there that you fulfill the desires of your Bhakta? The Bhaktas extol You by characterising You as Saguna (full of qualities), Nirguna (devoid of any quality) and Apārā, beyong all merits and demerits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! You are fully capable to destroy the fear of birth and death. What wonder is there that you fulfill the desires of your Bhaktas? The Bhaktas extol You by characterising You as Saguṇa (full of qualities), Nirguṇa (devoid of any quality) and Apārā, beyond all merits and demerits.

[Ch 23 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! O Bhuvanesvari! I am fortunate that I have been able to see You, and thus all my duties have become crowned with success. O Mother! I have no practices in the shape of Your meditation, etc. nor do I know any seed mantras of Yours; today I have fully seen Your glory manifested.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! O Bhuvaneśvarī! I am fortunate that I have been able to see You, and thus all my duties have become crowned with success. O Mother! I have no practices in the shape of Your meditation, etc. nor do I know any seed mantras of Yours; today I have fully seen Your glory manifested.

[Ch 23 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus extolled by the king Subāhu, the Goddess Bhagavatī, the Bestower of the Absolute Freedom, was pleased and said: "O thou, practice of good vows! Ask boon from Me." Thus ends the Twenty third Chapter on the killing of the enemy of Sudarśana in the great war, in Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus extolled by the king Subāhu, the Goddess Bhagavatī, the Bestower of the Absolute Freedom, was pleased and said “O thou, practiser of good vows! Ask boon from Me.” Thus ends the twenty third chapter on the killing of the enemy of Sudarśana in the great war, in Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
