CHAPTER VII

On Ahanikāra

व्यास उवाच:

इत्याकर्ण वचस्तासां धर्मपुत्र: प्रतपवान् ।

वियगीमक्रोरोच्चते किं कर्तेल्य मयाध्यान ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The Dharma's son, of excellent prowess, hearing thus, the words of these damsels, thought within himself, thus: what shall I do under the circumstances.

हास्योर्दुं मुपिव्युदेवु पविष्याम्यदा सङ्गमात् ।

अहक्रूगारिवं प्राणतं दुःखं नात्र विचाराणा ॥ 2 ॥

If I indulge now in sexual pleasures, I will be an object of laughter amongst the Munis. This present trouble has, no doubt, arisen from my Aharñkāra (egoism). This Aharñkāra is the first and foremost in ruining one's Dharma.

मूलं संसारखुक्ष्य यतः प्रोक्तो महात्मिभः ।

दूद्वा मौनं समाधाय न विश्तोड़ं समागतम् ॥ ३ ॥

वार्यान्नाराणं जुहं तेनासं दुःखभाजनम् ।

उनावित्तासथा नार्यों मया धर्मव्येयेन वै ॥ ४ ॥

तास्तु मां बाधितुं वृता: कामातीः प्रमदोतमाः ।

ऊर्पानिभिरिवाहाई जालेन स्वकृतेन वै ॥ 5 ॥

बद्धोर्सम सुवृदेवान्र किं कतंव्यमतः परम् ।

The wise sages have declared this Aharikāra as the root of this tree of world. I did not observe the vow of silence on seeing those damsels come here; I have held much conversations with them; therefore I have got into this troublesome anxiety and sorrow. I have created these damsels at the expense of my Dharma and Tapasyā. The beautiful and lovely damsels sent by Indra are now full of lust; and are bent on ruining my tapasyā. Now if through Aharikāra I had not created the damsels, I would not have fallen into this difficulty. Now I am caught firmly in the meshes of my own creation like a spider; what am I to do next?

यदि चिन्तां समूल्युख संलबान्यबलत इया: ॥ 6 ॥

ग्रणता प्रषा प्रजिष्यंति सर्वां भरनमोराधा: ।

मुक्तोड़े संचरिष्यामि विजने परमं तपः ॥ 7 ॥

तस्माकोंधे समुताया त्यश्यामि सुन्दीगणम् ।

If I abandon these damsels, thinking that there is no necessity to reconsider the matter, then would

Book IV Chapter VII

be broken hearted; and they would go away cursing me?

Yet I would be free from this present danger at least and then be able to practise excellent tapasyā in a lonely place. Therefore, now, I will get angry and tell these damsels go away from me.

यास उत्तर

इति सच्छित्य मनसा मुनिनारायणस्तदा ॥ 8 ॥

विशर्णमकरीचित्त से सुखोत्यादनसाधने ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Muni Nārāyaṇa thought that he would become thus happy; but, at the next moment, he discussed in his mind, thus:

द्वितीयोदयं महाशुः क्रोधः सन्तापकाकरः ॥ 9 ॥

कामायदधिको लोके लोपादरिध च दारूणः ।

The second great enemy is anger; it is greater than causing hurt to others; and it is greater than lust aud avarice.

कोधाधिषयुः कुभते हिंसां प्राणविषातिनीम् ॥ 10 ॥

युःख्वां सर्वभृतानां नरकारामदीर्धिकाम् ।

Out of anger people commit murder; this murder is the source of hell and is giving pain to all.

यवाउनिर्वर्षिणाज्ञातः पादायं प्रदेहेतावा ॥  १ १ ॥

देहोत्यजस्तथा कोधो देई दहति दाहणः ।

As trees, rubbing against each other, generate fire; and are themselves burnt up in this fire, arising from this body ultimately burns this body to death.

व्यास उचाच

इति सच्छित्यमानं तं छातरं दीनामानसम् ॥ १ २ ॥

उवाच वचनं तव्यं नतो धार्मुक्तोउनुः ।

Vyāsa said: The younger brother Nara on seeing his elder brother anxious and low-spirited, spoke out what is right, as follows:

नर उवाच

नारायण महाभाग कोघं यच्छ महामते ॥ १३ ॥

श्रान्ते भावं समाधित्य नाश्याहंकृति पराम् ।

O Nārāyaṇa! You are very intelligent and very good; therefore relinquish this feeling of anger and betake to quietude and peace, and kill this dreadful anger.

पुराडह्वारदोषण तपो नटं किलावयो: ॥ 14 ॥

संग्रामश्रावचताध्यां भावाध्यामसुरेण ह ।

दिख्यवर्षसहर्ने तु प्रहादेन महाद्रतम् ॥ 15 ॥

Do you not remember that it is through this Ahanikāra and anger that our tapasyā was destroyed on a previous occasion; and we had to fight severely with Prahlāda, the Lord of the Asuras for one full divine thousand years.

दुःखं बहुतरं प्रापतं त्रतावाण्यां सुरोतम ।

तत्सामकोंधे परित्यज्य शान्तो भव मनुभीक्ष ॥ 16 ॥

“शान्तत्वं तपासे मूलं मुनिभि: परिकीर्तितम् ।”

O Lord of the Devas! We were put to much difficulties then; therefore O Lord of the Munis! Get rid of this anger; be quiet! The sages declare the peace is the root cause and the only object of Tapasyā.

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः श्रुवा शान्तोरभूद्वर्मानन्दनः ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing these words of his younger brother Nara, the Dharma's son Nārāyana took to peace.

जनमेव तय उवाच

संशयोरयं मुनिश्रिक प्रहादेन महात्मान ॥ 17 ॥

विष्णुभक्तेन शान्तेन कथं युद्धं कृते पुरा ।

कृतवर्ती कर्थ युद्धं नरनारायणाथी ॥ 18 ॥

Janamejaya said: O Lord of the Munis! The high souled Prahlāda was a devotee of Viṣṇu and of a peace loving heart; how it was that, in the ancient days, the battle took place between him and these Rsis; how could the Rsis fight? There is this great doubt in my mind.

तापसौ धर्मपुत्री हौ सुशान्तमानसावृषी ।

समापाम: कथं जाततस्योद्स्युस्त्यच च ॥ 19 ॥

संग्रामस्तु कथं तत्थां कृतसेने महात्मना ।

प्रहादोर्ध्यतिप्रामीना ज्ञानाविख्युन्तर: ॥ 20 ॥

These two Dharma's sons were ascetics and peace loving; how the fight could come to pass between these and the Daityāsuras? How did these two Rṣis fight with the high-souled Prahlāda?

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ननारायणी तद्धतापसौ सत्वसंस्थितो ।

तेन ताध्यां सम्पूद्तं वैरं यदि परस्परम् ॥ 2 1 ॥

तदा तपसि धर्मे च भ्रम एव हि केवलम् ।

क्व जपः क्व तत्धश्यों पुरा सत्ययुगेपि च ॥ 2 2 ॥

Prahlāda was very religious, full of knowledge and very much devoted to Viṣṇu. Nara Nārāyaṇa were sattvik and ascetics; therefore if there had occurred enmity between those, it appears that the religion and asceticism, Tapasyā and Dharma were matters in name only; and the labour was spent in vain in the golden age even. What was the value of asceticism and meditation and muttering silently the mantras! No one can make out.

ताड़ीर्नीं जितं चित्तं क्रोभाढ़ार्यसंतुम् ।

न क्रोधो न च मातस्यंमहूर्जारूईं चित्ति ॥ २३ ॥

Oh! Persons like them could not conquer their hearts full of anger and egoism! Anger and jealousy cannot spring unless there be at the bottom a feeling of egoism (Aharikāra).

अहूर्णात्समुच्नाः कामकोधायः किल ।

वर्षकौटिसूईं तु तपः कृत्वासिताङ्गणम् ॥ 24 ॥

All the passions, lust, greed, anger etc., come out of Aharikāra (egoism), there is no doubt of it; one hundred lakh years of severe asceticism are rendered quite useless by the cropping up afterwards of a bit of Aharikāra.

अहक्रातृकृते जाते व्यर्थ भवति सर्वथा ।

यथा सूर्यदेव जाते तमोक्षப் न तिष्ठि ॥ 25 ॥

As darkness is dispelled entirely on sunrise, so no trace of religious merit can exist on the rising of a bit of Aharinkāra.

अहक्राणिक्रस्यो तथा पुर्यं न तिष्ठिति ।

प्रहावो5पि महाभाग हरिणा समयुध्यत ॥ 26 ॥

When Prahlada could fight with Śri Bhagavān Hari, then, Oh! all his merits in this world are rendered to no use whatsoever.

तदा व्यर्थ कृते सर्वे सुकृतं किल भृत्ते ।

नरनारायणी शान्ती विहाय परमं स्तः ॥ 27 ॥

Where is the religious merit and where is peace when the quiet souled persons Nara Nārāyaṇa, the

two Rāsis began to fight, without paying any heed to their highest end, the Tapasyā?

कृतवन्ती यदा युद्ध ब्ब शमः सुकृतं पुनः ।

ईरुभया सत्वयुक्ताध्यामजेया यद्यहुक्तिः ॥ 28 ॥

When Aharinkāra became invincible by the two Rṣis, then what can be expected from the weak trivial persons like us in the matter of subjugating this Aharinkāra?

मादुशानां च का वातां मुनेशडूगारसंक्षये ।

अहड़ापर्यित्यक्तः को:प्रथिति भुवनत्रये ॥ 29 ॥

Who can be free from Aharinkāra in these three worlds, when the high souled persons like the above were not free from it? I am quite confident that, in this Universe, no body was ever before free from Aharinkāra nor will there be any such in the distant future.

न भृती भविता नैव यस्यक्तसेन सर्वथा ।

मुच्यते लोहिनारेबैब्दः काक्यमैत्यया ॥ 30 ॥

One can be free bound by an iron or a wooden chain; but when one is pierced by Aharinkāra, one can never become free from it.

अहक्रातिनवब्दस्तु न कदाचिदिपुच्यते ।

अहक्रापितृ सर्वे जानत्यावरजंमम् ॥ 31 ॥

This whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is rolling in this Samsāra (migration and transmigration) plitted by urine and faeces, being covered by Aharikāra.

भ्रमवैव हि संसारे विश्रमूर्प्रदृषिते ।

ब्रह्मानं कुततवालसंसारे मोहसंवृते ॥ 32 ॥

Where is, then the Brahma Jñāna? O Good One in vows! The Karma theory, according to the Mimāṃsakas, seems reasonable and true.

मर्त मीमांसकानां वै समन्तं भाति सुझत ।

महान्तोर्पि सदा सुना: कामक्रोधादिषिभूर्पि ॥ 33 ॥

माइशानां कलावसिन्का कथा मुनिसत्तम ।

O Muni! What can you expect from weak minded persons like me in this Kali yuga, when the great persons are always overpowered with lust, anger, etc.

Book IV Chapter VII

यास उवाच

कार्य वै कारणादूढ़ं कथं घबाति भारत ॥ 34 ॥

कटकं कुण्डलं चैव सुवर्णस्वूर्ण भवेत् ।

अड़क्राणोद्धवं सर्व बह्याण्डे सचारातयम् ॥ 35 ॥

पटस्तेतुवश: प्रोक्तस्तिद्युतः कयं भवेत् ।

Vyāsa said: O Descendant of Bharata! How can the effect be different from its cause? Gold and golden ear-rings though different in form owing to upādhis, are both similar to their original cause, the metal gold.

Thread is the cause of cloth; therefore as cloth cannot be different from its thread, so this whole universe, moving and unmoving, is sprung from Aharīkāra; then how can it be free from Aharīkāra?

मायागृगीक्षिभि: सर्वे रचितं स्विराजुम् ॥ 36 ॥

सर्गुणं सत्यायर्तं का तत्र परिवेदना ।

All this, moving and unmoving, including a blade of grass, are fashioned out of the three qualities of Māyā; so if it be formed of those qualities, what repentance can come to those who are wise and know every phenomenon as unreal?

बहा विध्गुल्णा शूद्रसे चाहूक्रमोहिताः ॥ 37 ॥

भयंत्यमिन्महागाधे संसारे नृसनसि ।

O Best of kings! Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Maheśa, even these are all rolling in this vast ocean of Samsāra, being bewildered and fascinated by Aharṅkāra.

वसिष्ठनारदाश्रा मृनयो ज्ञानिन: परम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेशप्रभृतः संसरित संसारोप्रस्मिनुः पुनः ।

The great sages like Vasistha, Nārada and the other Munis are frequently taking their births in this Samsāra.

न कोय्प्रसित नृपश्रेष्ठ श्रिषु लोकेषु देहभृत् ॥ 39 ॥

एभियांयाणुर्गीभूतः शान्त आसमुखे स्थितः ।

In this Trilokī, there is not even one embodied soul, who is entirely free from this Māyā and has become quiet and immersed in the highest bliss of the Supreme Self.

कामाङ्गोरी तथा लोभो मोहोरुद्धूरासम्पवः ॥ 40 ॥

न मुईति नरं सर्वे देहवन्तं नृपोत्तम ।

O Best of kings! Lust, anger, avarice, and

fascination, all, arise from Aharñākara. These do not leave any embodied person.

अधीत्य वेद्गास्धानि पुराणानि विचित्यच च ॥ 41 ॥

कृत्वा तीर्थानंत दानं ध्यानं चैव सुरार्वनम् ।

कोरोति विषयासतः सर्व कंच च चोरत् ॥ 4 2 ॥

विचारयति नो पूर्व कामोमृहमाद्वित्यतः ।

Studying all the Vedas and Purāṇas, going to all the sacred places of pilgrimages, making charities, thinking on Paramātman and worshipping the gods, doing all these, the people still get attached to sensual objects and act like a thief.

कृते युगेशि जेतायां द्वापरे कुरनन्दन ॥ 43 ॥

विद्धोउसातित च धर्मेशि का कवाएड कली गुनः ।

O Son of Kuru! In the three yugas, the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, the Dharma had been pierced and wounded very much; what to say of the Dharma in this Kali Yuga!

स्पर्धा सदैव सहोहा लोपामर्षों च सर्वदा ॥ 4 4 ॥

एर्वविद्धोर्जित संसारो नात्र कार्यां विचारणा ।

You will find quarrels, avarice, anger raging always in this Kali yuga. Therefore there is no wonder that you will not find any one thinking and doing what is worth thinking, and doing what is not worth doing?

साधवो विर्ताल लोक भवन्ति गतमतसरा: ॥ 4 5 ॥

वितक्रोधा विज्ञापर्धा युद्धोतर्थं व्यवस्थितः ।

Free from envy, anger, and jealousy, such persons are rare now-a-days in this Kali yuga. Some peaceful persons exist here and there to keep up the ideal.

राजोवाच

ते धन्या: कृतपुण्यासे मद्गोहविशर्जितः ॥ 46 ॥

ब्रितेत्रिया: सदाचारा जितं तैभुविनयम् ।

The king said: O Muni! They are blessed and holy who are free from this fascination of Māyā, self-controlled, who have conquered their passions, and who follow good conduct. They have risen above the Trilokī.

दुनौमि पातकं सूच्या पितुर्मे महातनः ॥ 47 ॥

कृततत्पत्थिनः कण्डे मृतसर्पा हृधां विज्ञा ।

O Best of Munis! My high minded father put a dead serpent round the neck of an ascetic without any fault; I am very sorry to think of his act.

अतसत्य मुनिश्रेष भविता किं ममाता: ॥ 48 ॥

न जाने बुद्धिसंभोहाकि वा कार्यं भविष्यति ।

Therefore, O Muni! Kindly suggest any means by which I can now redress that act. O Bhagavān! I do not know what will be the result of this act, committed out of the bewildering of intellect.

मधु पश्यति मृतात्मा प्रपातं नैव पश्यति ॥ 49 ॥

कोति निर्विद्धं कर्म नरकाच विषेति च ।

Fools in search of honey see only honey before them but not the falls, whence they might tumble down and die. So the stupid men do disgraceful acts and do not get afraid of the tortures of hell.

कयं सुवृद्ध पुरा वृर्त विस्तारानुद्रवये ॥ ५० ॥

प्रहादेन यथा चोर्यं नरनारयणस्य वै ।

Kindly describe, in detail, how the fight incurred between Prahlāda and Nārāyaṇa in ancient times.

प्रहादस्तु कर्थ यातः पातालान्तद्वरवये ॥ ५१ ॥

सारयस्ते महतीर्थे पुणये बदरिकाओं ।

How was it that Prahlāda went out of Paṭāla (the nether regions) and went to the great holy place,

the hermitage of Badarikasrama in the Sārasvata country, the great place for pilgrimage.

नरनतावणी शान्ती तापसी मुनिसतमी ॥ 52 ॥

कृतवन्ती तथा युद्धे हेतुना केन मानत ।

O Muni! What was it that led the best of thet Munis, the two ascetics to fight with Prahlāda?

वैरं भवति विज्ञाथं दाराथं वा परमयम् ॥ 53 ॥

एषणारहिती कसमाचक्रतुः प्रधरं महत् ।

Enmity springs where there is wealth, wife, or land. The two Maharsis were desireless, had nothing of these; how, then, without any cause, they fought such a battle!

प्रहातोरप्र च धर्माना ज्ञाला देवी सनातने ॥ ५४ ॥

कृतवान्स कथं युद्धं नरनारायणी भुनी ।

Prahlada was also very religious and knew that those two Rsis were the Devas; knowing this, why did he fight with them?

एतद्धितस्तो बह्यन्त्रतुपिच्छामि कारणम् ॥ ५५ ॥

So describe in detail the cause of all these.

इति श्रीमद्वीभागकते महापुराणे चतुर्बंकनः

सत्तोउधान: 11 7 11

Here ends the Seventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses on

Ahankāra by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

