CHAPTER VI

On the Rivers and Mountains

शीनारायण उवाच

अकणोदा नदी या तु मया प्रोक्ता च नारद ।

मन्दाप्रिदपतंति सा पूर्वेणिलयुतं पलवेत् ॥ 1 ॥

यज्ञेणाद्ववान्याशुनर्याणं चिक्यामपि ।

यक्षन्यर्थपत्नीतं देहान्यवहोप्रलिनः ॥ 2 ॥

वासयत्थपिते भूमिं द्रणयोजनसंख्यया ।

एवं जम्बफलानां च तुङ़रेणिनपातन्ति ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! This Aruṇodā river that I mentioned to you rises from the Mandara mountain and flows by the east of Ilāvarsa. The Pavana Deva (the God of wind) takes up the nice smell from the bodies of the wives of the Yakṣas and Gandharvas, etc., and the attendants of the Devi Bhavānī and keeps the surroundings of the earth there filled with nice smell for ten Yojanas around.

विरीयर्यानमस्यीनां कुक्रशंगप्रभाणिणान् ।

सेन च नटी जयन्नानी मेवाल्यमदन्ता ॥ 4 ॥

पत्नती भूमिभागे च दक्षिणलात्वं गता ।

देवी जयकृपतल्यादतुषा जंब्यादिनी स्मृता ॥ 5 ॥

Again the rose-apples with their nuts, of the size of an elephant, fall down upon the earth from the high peace of the mountain Mandara and break into pieces; the sweet scented juices flow down as a river. This is called the Jambū river and this flows by the south of Ilāvarsa. The Devi Bhagavati there is pleased with the Juice of that rose-apple (Jambū) and is known by the name of Jambādini.

तत्रान्यानं च लोकानां देवनापरिषक्षसाम् ।

पूजनीयदा मान्या सर्वभूतदायकी ॥ 6 ॥

पावनी पाधिनां रोगनाशिनी स्मतामपि ।

कीर्तित विंनसंहर्गी माननीया दिवौकसम् ॥ 7 ॥

The Devas, Nāgas, and Rṣis all always worship with great devotion, the lotus-feet of the merciful Devi, wishing the welfare of all the Jivas. The mere remembering of the name of the Devi destroys all the diseases, and all the sins of the sinner. Therefore the Devas always worship and chant the names of the Devi, the Remover of all obstacles. She is installed on both the banks of the Jambū river.

कोकिलाश्री कामकाल करणा कामपूजिता ।

कठोरविग्राह धन्या नाकिमान्या भगवित्नी ॥ 8 ॥

एभिनांमपदेः कामं जपनीया सदा नृणाम ।

जबनुवतीरोधस्वोरा मृत्तिका तीरवर्तीनी ॥ 9 ॥

If men recite Her names Kokilāksī, Karunā, Kāmapūjītā, Kathoravigraha, Devapūjyā, Dhanyā, Gabhastinī and worship, so they get their welfare both in this world and in the next. With the juice of the Jambū fruit aided by the combination of the wind and the rays of the Sun, is created the gold.

जब्यूरसेनानुविद्धामाना वाय्यकंयोगतः ।

विद्याधारमास्त्रीणां भृपणं विविधं महत् ॥ 10 ॥

जाम्बून दूसणं च प्रोक्ते देवाविनिर्मितम् ।

यस्तुवर्ण च विद्युधा योचिष्टः कापुका: सदा ॥ 11 ॥

Out of this are made the ornaments for the wives of the Immortals and the Vidyādharas. This gold, created by the Daiva, is known by the name of the Jambūnada gold. The love-stricken Devas make their crowns waist bands and armlets out of this gold for their sweet-hearts.

मुकुटं कदिरूयं च केयुप्तीऋकुबंते ।

महाकद्वयः संप्रोक्तः सुपार्थिगिरसंस्थितः ॥ 12 ॥

तन्य कोटरदेशेणयः पढ़ धाराकु या: सपूता : ।

सुपार्थीगिरिमूर्सिंहि पतन्त्रेत भुवं गता: ॥ 13 ॥

There is a big Kadamba tree on the mountain Suparśva; the five streams of honey called Madhu Dhārā get out from its cavities and running by the west of Ilāvrta Varsa, flow over the land. The Devas drink its waters; and their mouths become filled with the sweet fragrance.

मधुपाता पछ्र तालु पश्रिमेलावृतं प्लुता: ।

याशीघपुज्यमानानां देवानां मुखगन्धभूत् ॥ 14 ॥

वायुः समं ततोणछ्छछलयोजनावसानः ।

धारेश्री महादेवी भक्तानां कार्यकारिणी ॥ 15 ॥

देवपूज्या महोत्साहा कालरूपा महान्ता ।

वसते कर्मफलव कान्ताग्रहणोशी ॥ 16 ॥

The air carries this sweet fragrant smell to a distance of even one hundred Yojanas. The

Book VIII Chapter VI

Dhāreśvari Mahā Devi dwells there, the fulfillment of the desires of the Bhaktas. highly energetic, of the nature of Kāla (the Time, the Destroyer), and having large faces (Mahānanā), faces everywhere, worshipped by the Devas and is the presiding Deity of the woods and forests all around.

करणलदेहा कालांनी कामकोटिपडर्सिति ।

इत्येनेनीमिभ: पूज्या देही सर्वेकुरुषी ॥ १ ७ ॥

एवं कुमुदरूको यो नाना शतकलो बट: ।

तत्ककभ्योपोधुपाख्या शव: कुभुदुपूर्णतः ॥ १ ८ ॥

पयोदिभयुधुपतुगझाठचारदिधि: ।

ग्यासनताभागरी: सर्वे कामुपग्रा ते ॥ १९ ॥

The Devī, the Lady of the Devas, is to be worshipped by the names “Kārāla Dehā,” Kālāngī “Kāmakotipravartini”. The great Banyan tree named Śatabala is situated on the top of the Kumud mountain. From its trunk many big rivers take their origin. These rivers possess such influences as to give to the holy persons there, the milk, curd, honey, clarified butter, raw sugar, rice, clothing, ornaments, seats, and beddings, etc., whatever they desire. Therefore these rivers are called Kāmadugh.

उत्तरौलावृतं ते एवाय्यत्न समंततः ।

मीनाक्षी ततले देवी देवासुरपिबिता 11 20 ||

नीलाब्यार रोगसुखी नीलालकुतना च सा ।

नाकिनों देवसंगानां फलदा वदा च सा 21 1 ||

They come gradually down the earth and flow by the north of Ilāvarsa. The Bhagavati Mināksī dwells there and is worshipped by the Suras and the Asuras alike. That Deity clothed blue, of fearful countenance, and ornamented with hairs of a blue colour, always fulfil the desires of the Devas dwelling in the Heavens.

अतिमान्यास्तिण्या च मत्तमातंगामिति ।

मदनोमादिति मानिथा मनाधिचान्ता ॥ 22 ॥

मारवेश्यत मारपूजिता मारमादिति ।

मयूरवर्शोधाक्वा शिखवाहनाभर्भेबुः ॥ 23 ॥

एभिनीमविदैवी देवी मीनतोलान ।

ज्ञातं स्मरतां मानदात्री चेधूसरंसीनी ॥ 24 ॥

Those that worship Her, remember Her or praise Her by the names “Atimānya, Atipūjyā, Mattamātaṅga Gāmīnī, Madanonmādīnī,

Mānapriyā, Mānapriyatarā, Māravegadhārā, Mārapūjītā, Māramādinī, Mayūravarasōbhādhyā, Śikhivāhanagarbhabhū, etc., are honoured by the Deity Minalocanā Ekāngarūpiṇī and the Paramesvāra and get all sorts of happiness.

तेषां नदानां पानीययानानुतचेतसाम् ।

प्रजानां न कदापित्याद्वारपीलतलब्णगम् ॥ 25 ॥

कलम्येवेदादि दौर्गध्यं जगमयमुपितिषामः ।

ग्रीतोष्णावतावेयप्युबोपलवसंवयः ॥ 26 ॥

नापदधुँव आयते यावज्जीवं सुखं भवेत् ।

नैततर्वेण ततत्यदे सुखं निरतिणासकम् ॥ 27 ॥

तत ऊर्ध प्रवक्ष्यामि संनिवेशं च तद्रिटः ।

सुवर्णमयनानो वे सुमेतेः पवेताः पृथक् ॥ 28 ॥

Those drink the clear waters of these rivers become free from old age or decay, worry, perspiration, bad smell, from any disease, or premature death. They do not suffer anything from error, from cold, heat, or rains, or from any paleness in their colour. They enjoy extreme happiness as long as they live and no dangers come to them.

निरयो विंशातिपयाः कार्षिकाया इवेह ते ।

कैसरीभूय सर्वेपि मेरोमूर्तिधमागके ॥ 29 ॥

परितशोपकल्पताते तेनां नामानि शृण्वतः ।

कुरंईः कुरणक्षेक कुसुम्भोर्धा चिककतः ॥ 30 ॥

त्रिकूटः शिशिराक्षे पतड़ो रचकस्थता ।

निथश्धु शिशिरासी: कपिलः शंख एव च ॥ 31 ॥

बैदूर्यंशकाधिक्षे हंसो जस्पण एव च ।

नागः कालज्ञश्रकि नारदक्षिति विंशरतः ॥ 32 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वेदीभागत महापुराणोर्ध्यमक्ये फर्सोर्धया: ११ ६ ११

O Child! Now hear the names of the other twenty mountains, that encircle the Golden Sumeru mountain at its base, as if they were they filaments round the pericarp of a flower. The first is Kuraṅga; then come in order Kuraga, Kuśumbha, Vikañkata, Trikūta, Śiśira, Pataṅga, Rucaka, Niṣadha, Śitīvāsa, Kapila, Śaṅkha, Vaidūra, Ćarudhi, Harīsa, Rṣabha, Nāga, Kālaṅjara and lastly Nārada. The central one is the twentieth.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the rivers and the mountains Sumeru and others in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

