CHAPTER VI

On The Devas' Praying to the Munī Agastya

सूत उवाच

श्रीगस्य वचनादेवाः संनुहाः सर्व एव हि ।

प्रसाधनसो भूत्वा पुनरेनं समृष्विं ति । ।।

Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Lakṣmī, all the Devas become pleased and they spoke:

देवा कचुः

देवदेव महाविष्णो सृहित्धन्तंकारण ।

विष्णो विर्ययनगोड़कस्य मार्तीधं करोति हि ॥ 2 ॥

तेन भानुविरोधेन सर्व एस महाविभो ।

अलध्यभोपाभागा हि किं कुम्: कुंत्र यामहि ॥ 3 ॥

The Devas said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Visṇu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Visṇu! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun’s course. Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our share of

Book X Chapter VI

Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know."

श्रीभगवानुवाच

या कार्जी सर्वजगतामाधा च कुलवर्धनी ।

देवी भगवती तत्या: पूजकः परमधुति: ॥ 4 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial Śakti Bhagavati, the Creatrix of this Universe.

अगत्स्यो मुनिवर्गेसी वाराण्यां सामाते ।

ततेजोर्वकौड़गस्यो भविष्यति सुरोतमाः ॥ 5 ॥

तं प्रसाहा द्विजवरमास्यं परमौजसम् ।

याच्छं विद्युपा: कार्णिं गत्वा नि: श्रेयस: पदीम् ॥ 6 ॥

This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal Vindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to got to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get Nirvāna; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your object).”

सूत उवाच

एवं समुपदिष्यते विष्णुना विबुधोतमाः ।

प्रतीता: प्रगता: सर्वे जन्मुबांगरणसी पुरीम ॥ ७ ॥

Sūta said: “O Rsis! Thus ordered by Viṣṇu, the gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares.

क्षणेन विबुधप्रेशा गत्वा काशीपुरी शुभाम् ।

मिफाकर्णी समाल्छूल सर्वेलं भक्तिरमंशुना ॥ ८ ॥

संतर्षे देर्वांशि पिटुन्चता दानं विधानतः ।

आगत्य मुविवर्धेय चाङ्गमं परमं महत ॥ 9 ॥

In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at the Manikarnikā ghāt, worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered Tarpanas to the Pitrs and duly made their charities. Then they went to the excellent Śārama of the Muni Agastya.

प्रगतंशप्रदाकर्शनं नानापादपसंकुलम् ।

मधुरै: सारसैईर्शऊकावैकृपाश्रिभान् ॥ 10 ॥

महावारहै: कोलेश्ठ व्याधेः शार्गैंटकर्षिति ।

मृगी रूकभित्यर्थं खड़ैः शरणभक्ररि ॥ 11 ॥

The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped ani-

mals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, herons, geeses and Cakravākas and various other birds tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was free fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful.

सभाशितं परमथा लक्ष्यम मुनिवर्ते त्वा ।

दण्डवत्पत्तिताः सर्वे प्रणेपूछ पुनः पुनः ॥ 12 ॥

On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again and again to him.

देवा ऊचुः

जय ब्रिजाणाधीश मान्य पूज्य धरासुर ।

वातापीबल्नाशय नामसे कृष्यभोयरे ॥ 13 ॥

लोपामुझपते श्रीमन्प्रावक्षणसभ्यच ।

सर्वविद्यानिरेपरस्व शगक्षयेने नमोसूत ते ॥ 14 ॥

They then chanted hymns to him and said: O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of Vātāpi, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of Śrī, the son of Mitrāvaruna! Thou art the husband of Lopāmuḍrā. Thou art the store house of all knowledge.

यथोदाये प्रसानीन भव-नुज्ज्वलभाज्यि ।

तोयाति तोयार्थीनां तस्मै तुर्थ्यं मोनोस्तु ते ॥ 15 ॥

काशुप्यविकासाय लंकावासिधाय च ।

जटामपडल्युक्ताय सशिष्याय नमोस्तु ते ॥ 16 ॥

Thou art the source of all the Śāstras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kāśa flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. Śrī Rāma Candra is one of Thy chief disciples.

जय सर्वमित्तव्य गुणारोही महामुने ।

वरिष्ठाय च पूजाय सखीकाव नमो3स्त ते ॥ 17 ॥

प्रसादः क्रियतां स्वामिव्यं त्वां शरणं गताः ।

दुस्तराष्छेलानदु खात्यिजिताः परममुते ॥ 18 ॥

O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from

Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam

all the Devas! O Best! The Store house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopāmuḍrā! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Vindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Because of this, we are

इत्येवं संस्तुतेजास्यो मुपिन: परमधार्यिकः ।

ग्राह प्रसवा वाचा विहस्त् द्विसस्तमः ॥ १९ ॥

Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and graciously said:

मुनिवाचा

भवन्तः परमश्रेष्ठा देवालिक्षपवेनेश्वरा ।

लोकपाल महात्मानो सिग्राहनुपहक्षमः ॥ 20 ॥

योभगवत्यशीगानः कुलिशं यस्य याव्याम् ।

सिद्वार्यके च यद्वादारि स शक्रो मस्तां पति: ॥ 21 ॥

"O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, highshould, and the preserver of the Lokas. If your wish, you can favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas.

वैधानरः कृशानूई ह्वल्यक्यवहो5निशम् ।

भुख सर्वमाणां है सोडीन: किं तस्य दुकम् ॥ 22 ॥

What is there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitrs, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas.

रक्षोगाणाधियो भीमः सर्वेधां कर्मसाधिकः ।

दण्डव्यप्रको देख: किं तस्यासुकरं सुरा: ॥ 23 ॥

नवापि यदि देखेगा: कार्य मच्छनिर्भिद्धभूत् ।

अस्ति चेद्युत्पतिं देवा: कार्चिधामि न संशया: ॥ 24 ॥

Is there anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the Rāksasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Rāja. What is there that the he can not accomplish? Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly.

एवं मुनिवरणोन्के निशम्य विवृतधर्षाः ।

प्रतीतः प्राणयोहिनना: कार्य निजगनुदिनम् ॥ 25 ॥

महर्षे विध्यमिरिणा निक्छोड़कविनिगाः ।

त्रैलोकयं तेन संविधे हाहामुपनयेचेतम् ॥ 26 ॥

Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began to say what they wanted. O Maharṣi! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are now verging to the ruins.

तद्वन्द्रि स्तम्भय मुने निजया तपसः श्रिया ।

भवतसोजसागरस्य नूनं नोघो भविष्यिति ।

एतदेवासदीयं च कार्य कर्तल्यमिति है ॥ 27 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणे दयामकबन्धे षटोधायाः । 6 ।

O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Vindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we want.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Vindhya Range in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

