[Ch 6 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rṣis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Lakṣmī, all the Devas become pleased and they spoke:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- O Ṛṣis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Lakṣmī, all the Devas became pleased and they spoke.

[Ch 6 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devas said: “O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Visṇu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Visṇu! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun’s course. Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our share of Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devas said :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Mahā Viṣṇu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Viṣṇu! The Bindhya mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun’s course. Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our share of Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know.

[Ch 6 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavān said: “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial Śakti Bhagavati, the Creatrix of this Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Bhagavān said :-- “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial Śakti Bhagavatī, the Creatrix of this Universe.

[Ch 6 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal Vindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to got to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get Nirvāna; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your object).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal Bindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to go to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get Nirvāṇa; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your object).”

[Ch 6 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: “O Rsis! Thus ordered by Viṣṇu, the gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said: -- O Ṛṣis! Thus ordered by Viṣṇu, the gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares.

[Ch 6 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at the Manikarnikā ghāt, worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered Tarpanas to the Pitrs and duly made their charities. Then they went to the excellent Śārama of the Muni Agastya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at the Maṇikarṇikā ghāṭ, worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered Tarpaṇas to the Pitris and duly made their charities. Then they went to the excellent Āśrama of the Muni Agastya.

[Ch 6 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped ani- mals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, herons, geeses and Cakravākas and various other birds tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was free fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped animals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, herons, geese and Cakravākas and various other birds, tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was free from fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful.

[Ch 6 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again and again to him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again and again to him.

[Ch 6 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then chanted hymns to him and said: O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of Vātāpi, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of Śrī, the son of Mitrāvaruna! Thou art the husband of Lopāmuḍrā. Thou art the store house of all knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then chanted hymns to him and said :-- O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of Vātāpī, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of Śrī, the son of Mitrāvaruṇa! Thou art the husband of Lopāmudrā. Thou art the store house of all knowledge.

[Ch 6 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the source of all the Śāstras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kāśa flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. Śrī Rāma Candra is one of Thy chief disciples.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the source of all the Śāstras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kāśa flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. Śrī Rāma Candra is one of Thy chief disciples.

[Ch 6 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from Śrimaddevīthāgāvatam all the Devas! O Best! The Store house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopāmuḍrā! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Vindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Because of this, we are
NEW CORR ENG ──► O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from all the Devas! O Best! The Store-house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopāmudrā! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Bindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Be

[Ch 6 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and graciously said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and graciously said :--

[Ch 6 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, highshould, and the preserver of the Lokas. If your wish, you can favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, highsouled, and the preserver of the Lokas. If you wish, you can favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas.

[Ch 6 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What is there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitrs, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What is there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitris, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas.

[Ch 6 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Is there anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the Rāksasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Rāja. What is there that the he can not accomplish? Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Is there anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the Rākṣasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Rāja. What is there that he cannot accomplish? Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly.

[Ch 6 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began to say what they wanted. O Maharṣi! The Vindhya mountain has risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are now verging to the ruins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began to say what they wanted. O Mahārṣi! The Bindhya mountain has risen very high and thwarted the Sun’s course in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are now verging to the ruins.

[Ch 6 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Vindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we want. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Vindhya Range in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevithāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Bindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we want. Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devaś praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Bindhya Range in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
