CHAPTER III

On the Previous Curse of Vasudeva

व्यास उवाच

कारणानि बहून्यायवतते हरे: किल ।

सर्वेयं चैव देवानारंगवतरणोबयि ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The incarnation of Śrī Hari and the incarnation of the Arniśa Avatāras of all the other. Devas are accountable to many causes. (The chief cause being Karma; the minor cause being many.

वसुदेवावतारस्य कारणं श्रणु तत्वतः ।

देवकमाश्रीव गौहित्या अवतारस्य कारणम् ॥ 2 ॥

Hear, now, the cause of incarnations of Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa's father), Devaki and Rohinī in detail.

एकदा कश्यपः श्रीमान्यत्राज्यं धेनुमाहरत् ।

याचित्तोयं बहुविधं न ददो धेनुमुत्तमाम् ॥ ३ ॥

Once, on an occasion, Śrīmān Kāśyapa stole away away the Kāmadhenu (the heavenly Cow, yielding all desires) of the Deva Varuna for his sacrificial purpose; and though he was entreated by Varuna often and often to return the cow,

Kaśyapa did not return to him that, the best of all the cows.

वरभान्तु ततो गत्वा बढ़ाणं जगतः प्रधम् ।

प्रणयोवाच दीनात्मा स्वदुःखं विनयान्वितः ॥ 4 ॥

Varuna became very sorry; he went to Brahmā, the Lord of the creation and told him humbly all that had happened and about his sorrows.

कि कंपीम माहाभाग मनोउसी न द्वताति गाम् ।

ग्राणो मया विमृष्ठोउस्मै गोपालो घव मानुषे ॥ ५ ॥

भार्ये ढे अपि तदेव भवेतां चातितु:खिते ।

ततो वत्सा रूदत्यत्र मगृहीना: सुयु:खिता: ॥ 6 ॥

“O Glorious One! Maharṣi Kaśyapa is now almost infatuated with his sacrifice; and though I have tried all my means, he is not returning me my cow. I could not hear the pitiful cries and wailings of the calves on bereavement from their mother; and I cursed Kaśyapa saying “You would go down and take birth in the human world as a cow-herd; and your two wives also are to go there as human

mortals, suffering under the greatest difficulties and dangers."

भुतवस्तासप्रतितस्तस्माद्विवधिति धरातले ।

कारागतिनावसा च तेनापि बहुदुः प्रित्ता ॥ 7 ॥

O Brāhmana! On seeing the distressed condition of the calves I cursed Aditi a second time that the would be put to prison, her children would be still born, and she would suffer lots of troubles."

व्यास उचाच

तच्छुंला चचनं यादोनाशस्य पदापुः ।

समाहूय मुनिं तत्र तमुवाच प्रपापतिः ॥ ८ ॥

O Janamejaya! Hearing this, the Lotus-born Brahmā called Kaśyapa before him and asked.

कस्मात्चया महाभाग लोकपालस्य दोषतः ।

हताः पुनर्न दत्ताश किमन्यायं करोषि च ॥ 9 ॥

O Fortunate One! Why have you stolen away all the cows of the Varuna Deva, the Guardian of a quarter of the world? And why have you committed an offence in not returning the cows to Him?

जान्यायं महाभाग परवितापहारणम् ।

कृतवान्कल्यन्यायं सर्वेजोस्ति महामते ॥ 10 ॥

Bhagavan! You are intelligent, you know everything fully; knowing that it is a sin to steal other's property, why have you committed this unlawful act of stealing away the cows.

अही तोभस्य महिमा महतोप्रे न मुच्छित ।

तोभं नरकंद नूनं पायाकरमर्मनम् ॥ १ १ ॥

Oh! What is the wonderful influence of covetuousness! Even those that are great are not free from the clutches of greed. Covetuousness is the source of all sins, is unapproved by the Sages and leads to hell.

क्यपोष्पि न ते ल्यूके समर्थः किं कतोभ्यहम् ।

सर्वदेवाधिकस्तमालोभो वै कलितो मया ॥ १२ ॥

Lo! Maharși Kaśyapa is not able to leave this vicious habit even now; what shall I do? will hence count greed as more powerful than even Fate, the Ruler of all destinies.

ध्यातसे मुनवः शान्ता जितो वैलॉभ एव च ।

वैखानसै: शमपरैः प्रतिग्रहणराछूगईः ॥ 13 ॥

Besseed are those saints that have devoted themselves wholly to the attain ment of peace, who are tranquil-hearted, lead a hermit life and don't ask themselves of any thing from any body. Verily those are blessed.

संसारे बलवाञ्छुतर्णीफोमेध्योङर: सदा ।

कर्यपोर्गि दुगाचर: कृतनसेहो दुर्गतवना ॥ 14 ॥

This covetuousness is a powerful enemy; it is always unholy and odious. See! Its influence has overpowered the Maharşi Kaśyapa and has tied him down to an ordinary affection and has urged him to commit a sinful act.

बह्यापि तं शगाणाय कर्यपं मुनिसतमम् ।

मयांदारक्षणार्थ हि पौरं परमवललभम् ॥ 15 ॥

अंगेन तंचे पुथिख्यां वे प्रायः जन्म यदो: कुले ।

भार्थ्या संयुतस्तत्र गोपागतलं कौरियसि ॥ 16 ॥

Then the Prajāpati Brahmā, to preserve and keep the prestige in the name of Justice and Religion, cursed his own very dear grandson Kaśyapa, the best of the Munis, and said: "Go to the earth in your Aṃśa, and take your birth in the Yadu clan, be united with your wives and work as a Cowherd."

व्यास उवाच

एवं शपतः कथयपोजसी वरूणेन च ब्रहूणा ।

अंशावतरणाथाव भूभारहणाय च ॥ 17 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Thus was cursed the Maharṣi Kaśyapa by Brahmā and Varuna to come down to the earth as Anśāvatāra to relieve the earth of her burden.

तथा दित्यासदिति: शगता शोकसंतदाया घृष्णम् ।

जाता जाता विनयेशेरनव पुगास्तु सत वे ॥ 18 ॥

Diti, too, becoming grieved much with sorrows, cursed Aditi that seven of her sons would be killed consecutively after their births.

जनमेज्य उवाच

कस्माहित्या च भारिनी शगतेज्ञजनी मुते ।

कारणं वद्र शगपे च शोकस्तु मुनिसनम ॥ 19 ॥

Janamejaya said: O best of Munis! Why was it that Diti so cruelly cursed his sister Aditi, the

Book IV Chapter VI

mother of Indra? Kindly explain to me the cause of this and oblige. I am sorry to hear of this curse.

सूत उवाच

पारतीक्षितेन पृथस्तु व्यास: सत्यवतीभुतः ।

राजानं प्रत्युवाचेदे कारणं सुसमाहितः ॥ 20 ॥

Sūta said: Thus asked by the son of Parksit, Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, himself replied to the king about their cause in the following words.

व्यास उवाच

राजन्दक्षसुते हे तु द्वितिःधारितिज्ञाने ।

कथयस्य प्रिये भार्ये बथूवतुरुककमे ॥ 21 ॥

Vyāsa said: Dakṣa Prajāpati had two daughters, Diti and Aditi; these two, of high rank, were married to Kāśyapa; and they were his favourites.

अदित्वां मघवा पुत्रो यदतप्रदृत्तीर्वर्गत् ।

तदा तु तातृषं पुंत्रं चकमे दितिरोजसा ॥ 22 ॥

Aditi gave birth to the very powerful Indra, the king of the Devas. Diti, too, asked for a son of the same strength, prowess, and splendour as those of Indra.

विमामहासितापांगी पुत्रं मे देहि मान्दि ।

इन्द्रतुल्यं बलं वीरं धर्मिष्ठी व्रीयंततम् ॥ 23 ॥

Diti, of beautiful dark blue eyes, entreated to her husband and said, "Give me a son, O giver of due respects to every body! who shall be a hero as strong as Indra, religious and of indomitable energy."

तामुवाच मुनि: कान्ते स्वस्था भव मयोदिति ।

त्रान्ते भविता तुभ्यं शतकृतसूम: सुतः ॥ 24 ॥

The Muni said to her: "O Dear! Be peaceful; I advise you to take a vow, practise a rite, and when the period of your practice will be over, you will get a son like Indra."

सा तयेति प्रतिश्रुच चकार ततमुत्तमम् ।

निविष्तं भुनीना नर्भ विश्राणा सुमनोहरम् ॥ 25 ॥

Diti promised to act according to his word and took an oath; and when she practised the vow, Maharṣi Kāśyapa impregnated the seed in her womb, Diti also bore the seed in her womb according to the usual rite.

भूमी चकार शयनं यपोबतपरायणा ।

पशिया धाणायुक्ता बभूव वरबर्धितीः ॥ 26 ॥

The excellent fair complexioned Diti remained sacred, observed all the rules and, deeply intent on her vow, subsisted only on milk and slept on the ground.

एवं जातः सुसंगुणो यदा गर्भांति विश्वेयान् ।

गृष्धागृधानिरीतर्णांति दिति दृष्टवा तु दुःविता ॥ 27 ॥

मघवत्सदूग: पुत्रो भविष्यति महावल: ।

दिव्यास्तदा मम सुततलेजोहीनो भवेकित्व ॥ 28 ॥

Thus when the foetus was fully developed, Diti began to look white and full of splendonr. On seeing her thus, Aditi became anxious and thought if there be born of Diti a son like the powerful Indra, then my son will no doubt be deprived of his brilliance and splendour.

इति चित्तापरा उपमिन्द्रो चोवारा मानिनी ।

श्रुस्तोडा समुन्त्रजो दितिभर्षेडितीर्वीयान् ॥ 29 ॥

The proud Aditi, thinking thus, said to Indra: "O Son! There, in the womb of Diti, is your powerful enemy.

उपायं कुक नाशाय शजोरा विचित्र च ।

उर्वत्तिरेव हंल्या दिव्या भार्येय शोभन ॥ 30 ॥

O Beautiful One! Even now think out how you can kill your enemy. Before the child is born of the womb, try to destroy it.

वीक्ष्य तामसितापर्गी सप्तनीभावमास्थिताम् ।

दुनौति हदये चिता सुखमर्पविनारिणी ॥ 31 ॥

Since the time I have looked on my co-wife Diti, of beautiful eyes and proud, this is the one and only thought that troubles the peace in the innermost of my hearts.

तराजस्थेल संखुच्दो नहो नैव भवेद्रिपुः ।

तस्मादंकृति हन्यादखुद्विमान्तिं किल ॥ 32 ॥

The enemy, if he firmly gets hold like a fully developed consumption, cannot be killed; therefore the intelligent persons should destroy their enemies, when they are in their bud.

लोहांगुकौक्र विश्वो गर्भों वै हृदये मय ।

येन केनायुपायेन पातयावा तघकते ॥ 33 ॥

O Śatakratu! My heart is being pierced wholly by an iron spoke when I see the womb of Diti; kill it by any means you can!

सामदानवलेनापि हिंसनीयस्वल्या सुतः ।

दिव्या भर्षों महापाना मय चेदिछ्छसि पियम् ॥ 34 ॥

O High minded One! If you wish my welfare, then destroy the foetus, in the womb of Diti, by any of the existent means, Sāma, Dāna or strength and thus remove the cause of grief in my heart."

व्यास उवाच

श्रुवा मातृवचः शको विधिंचेय मतसा तः ।

जगाभापरमातुः स समीपममराधिपः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

Vyāsa said: On hearing his mother, Indra, the King of the Immortals, thought over all the means and went then to his step-mother Diti.

ववंदे विन्यात्यादौ दित्या पापमतिनरूप ।

प्रोबाय विनयेनासी ममूरं विशर्पितान् ॥ ३६ ॥

That evil minded Indra bowed down at the foot of Diti with humility and addressed her with words, sweet but full of poison.

इन्ट उवाच

भातस्वे ततयुक्तप्रसि क्षिणद्दोर्जान्तद्वैत ।

संवार्थीमू संप्राप्नः किं कर्तेयं वद्यव मे ॥ 37 ॥

“O mother! You have become very weak, lean and thin in the practise of your vow. I have come to serve you; order me now what I can do for you.

यावसंवाहन्ते तेर्कं कृत्याभ्यम पतितं ।

गृहशूक्ष्णातपुर्णं लभते गतिमक्षायाम ॥ ३ ८ ॥

O chaste one to your husband! I want to shampoo your feet. To serve one's Guru means to earn righteousness and immortality.

न मे किमपि भेदोर्सित तथातिद्या शपे किल ।

इत्युस्चना चरणी स्पूच्या सेवाहनपरो3पवत् ॥ 39 ॥

O mother! I swear, on oath, I don't make any difference between you and my mother Aditi." Saying thus, he touched her feet and began to shampoo her legs.

संवाहनसुखं प्राय निद्रामय सुलोचना ।

शांता तत्कुशा सुमता विश्रता परम सती ॥ 40 ॥

The beautiful eyed Diti, tired of the vow, lean

and thin, thus being shampooed and having full faith in Indra's words, fell to deep sleep.

तां निद्रावरामपातं विलोक्य प्राविशतन्नु।

रूपं कृत्वात्रिसूभं च शरक्षाणिः समाहितः ॥ 41 ॥

उदरं प्रविवेशगृ तत्या योगवलेन वै ।

गर्ष चकर्ते वज्जेण सन्ताया पर्विनायकः ॥ 42 ॥

Seeing her asleep, Indra, with thunderbolt in his hand, took his subtle form and by the influence of his yogic power, entered carefully into her womb quickly and cut asunder the foetus in the womb into seven parts.

रोदे च तदा वाले वज्जेणाशिन्तस्तथा ।

मा रहेति शनैर्वाक्यमुवाच मघवानुम् ॥ 43 ॥

शकलानि पुनः सप्त सप्तथा कतिलानि च ।

तदो वैकॉनंचाशन्मतक्ष्राभववुम् ॥ 44 ॥

The child in the womb, struck by the thunder bolt, cried out. Indra spoke to the child gently: "Do not cry," and in the mean while cut each of the seven parts into seven parts again. Thus, O king! The forty-nine Maruts were born.

तदा प्रबुद्धा सुदर्ती जाला गर्भ तथा कृतम् ।

इन्हेण छलकर्णे चुकांप भुशपु:वित्ता ॥ 45 ॥

When the good natured Diti awoke, she came to know that Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb and became very sorry and angry.

भगीनकृतु तु सा बुद्ध्या शणाग कुपिता तत ।

अदिति मघवन्तं च सच्वततपरायणा ॥ 46 ॥

यथा मे कर्तिते गर्भरतव पुत्रेण छघना ।

तथा तत्रागमापातु राज्यं त्रिशुवनस्य तु ॥ 47 ॥

Knowing that all these treacherous acts are really done under the advice of her sister, the truthful Diti; who was under the vow, cursed Aditi, and Indra, saying that as her son Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb, Indra's kingdom over the three worlds would be destroyed.

यथा गुप्तेन पायेन मम गर्भं निवातितः ।

अदित्या पापचारीपया यथा मे पातितः सुनः ॥ 48 ॥

तस्या: पुजास्तु नस्पन्तु जाता जाता: पुनः पुनः ।

कारागरे वसलैया पुत्रगोकारुप भृगम् ॥ 49 ॥

अन्यज्मनि चायेव मृतापत्या भविष्यति ।

Book IV Chapter IV

And as the sinful Aditi has secretly caused the destruction of my son, her sons, too, would also die after their birth consecutively and she would dwell in the prison house in much trouble and anxiety and would also bear still born sons in her next birth.

यास उत्तरा

इत्युसूई तदा श्रुत्वा शापं मरीचिनन्दन: ॥ 50 ॥

उदार प्रणयोपेता वचनं समयबिल ।

Vyāsa said: O king! Maharṣi Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, hearing the curse, allayed her anger with loving words.

भा कोर्भ कुरु कल्याणि पुत्रासे बलवतरा: ॥ 51 ॥

भविष्यन्ति सुरा: सर्वे मन्तो मवत्सतखा: ।

O Blessed One! Do not be angry. Your sons would all become very powerful and would be called Maruts. They would be companions and friends to Indra.

शापोयं तव यामोक त्वहार्विंशेध द्वारे ॥ 52 ॥

अंशेन मानुं जन माप थोभ्यति भामिति ।

O Dear! Your curse won't be fruitless; in the 28th Manvantara, at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, your curse will bear fruit. Then Aditi, sinful for her jealousy and anger, will go down on earth to

take the human birth through her Anīsa (part) and suffer according to your curse.

वक्तोनापि द्नोडसि शाप: सन्तापितेन च ॥ 53 ॥

उभयो: शापयोगेन मानुरीयं भविष्यति ।

Varuna, too, had become very grieved and cursed her. And, due to both these curses, this Aditi will be born as a woman.

व्यास उवाच

पतिनाउंश्रासिता देवी नसूला सोउभवस्त्ता ॥५४।।

नोवाच विधिप्रं किक्षित्ततः सा वरवर्षिणी ।

O King! The fair complexioned Diti, thus consoled by her husband, became glad and did not utter any more unpleasant words.

इति ते कविरा राजन्यरोगायस्य काराणम् ।

अदितिर्देशकी जाता स्वांगेन नृपसत्तम ॥ 55 ॥

O king! Thus I have narrated to you the cause of the previous curse. O best of kings! Thus Aditi was born as Devakī out of her Anísā.

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्विकन्ये

तृतीयोउद्यानः ॥ 56 ॥

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses on the former curse of Vasudeva and Devakī by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter IV

