[Ch 3 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! The incarnation of Śrī Hari and the incarnation of the Arniśa Avatāras of all the other. Devas are accountable to many causes. (The chief cause being Karma; the minor cause being many.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king; The incarnation of Hari and the incarnation of the Amsa Avatāras of all the other Devas are accountable to many causes. The chief cause being Karma; the minor causes being many.

[Ch 3 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hear, now, the cause of incarnations of Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa's father), Devaki and Rohinī in detail.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hear, now, the cause of the incarnations of Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa’s father), Devakī and Rohinī in detail.

[Ch 3 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, Śrīmān Kāśyapa stole away away the Kāmadhenu (the heavenly Cow, yielding all desires) of the Deva Varuna for his sacrificial purpose; and though he was entreated by Varuna often and often to return the cow, Kaśyapa did not return to him that, the best of all the cows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, Śrīmān Kaśyapa stole away the Kāmadhenu (the heavenly Cow, yielding all desires) of the Deva Varuṇa for his sacrificial purpose; and though he was entreated by Varuṇa often and often to return the cow, Kaśyapa did not return to him that, the best of all the cows.

[Ch 3 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna became very sorry; he went to Brahmā, the Lord of the creation and told him humbly all that had happened and about his sorrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa became very sorry; he went to Brahmā, the Lord of the creation and told him humbly all that had happened and about his sorrows.

[Ch 3 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Glorious One! Maharṣi Kaśyapa is now almost infatuated with his sacrifice; and though I have tried all my means, he is not returning me my cow. I could not hear the pitiful cries and wailings of the calves on bereavement from their mother; and I cursed Kaśyapa saying “You would go down and take birth in the human world as a cow-herd; and your two wives also are to go there as human mortals, suffering under the greatest difficulties and dangers."
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Glorious One! Maharṣi Kaśyapa is now almost infatuated with his sacrifice; and though I have tried all my means, he is not returning me my cow. I could not hear the pitiful cries and wailings of the calves or bereavement from their mother; and I cursed Kaśyapa saying ‘You would go down and take birth in the human world as a cow-herd; and your two wives also are to go there as human mortals, suffering under the greatest difficulties and dangers.

[Ch 3 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmana! On seeing the distressed condition of the calves I cursed Aditi a second time that the would be put to prison, her children would be still born, and she would suffer lots of troubles."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! On seeing the distressed condition of the calves I cursed Aditi a second time that she would be put to prison, her children would be still born, and she would suffer lots of troubles.

[Ch 3 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! Hearing this, the Lotus-born Brahmā called Kaśyapa before him and asked.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Janamejaya! Hearing this, the Lotus-born Brahmā called Kaśyapa before him and asked.

[Ch 3 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Why have you stolen away all the cows of the Varuna Deva, the Guardian of a quarter of the world? And why have you committed an offence in not returning the cows to Him?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fortunate One! Why have you stolen away all the cows of the Varuṇa Deva, the Guardian of a quarter of the world? And why have you committed an offence in not returning the cows to Him?

[Ch 3 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavan! You are intelligent, you know everything fully; knowing that it is a sin to steal other's property, why have you committed this unlawful act of stealing away the cows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavān! You are intelligent, you know everything fully; knowing that it is a sin to steal other’s property, why have you committed the unlawful act of stealing away the cows.

[Ch 3 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! What is the wonderful influence of covetuousness! Even those that are great are not free from the clutches of greed. Covetuousness is the source of all sins, is unapproved by the Sages and leads to hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! What is the wonderful influence of covetousness! Even those that are great are not free from the clutches of greed. Covetousness is the source of all sins, is unapproved by the Sages and leads to hell.

[Ch 3 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lo! Maharși Kaśyapa is not able to leave this vicious habit even now; what shall I do? will hence count greed as more powerful than even Fate, the Ruler of all destinies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lo! Maharṣi Kaśyapa is not able to leave this vicious habit even now; what shall I do? I will hence count greed as more powerful than even Fate, the Ruler of all destinies.

[Ch 3 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Besseed are those saints that have devoted themselves wholly to the attain ment of peace, who are tranquil-hearted, lead a hermit life and don't ask themselves of any thing from any body. Verily those are blessed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Blessed are those saints that have devoted themselves wholly to the attainment of peace, who are tranquil-hearted, lead a hermit life and don’t ask themselves of any thing from any body. Verily those are blessed.

[Ch 3 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This covetuousness is a powerful enemy; it is always unholy and odious. See! Its influence has overpowered the Maharşi Kaśyapa and has tied him down to an ordinary affection and has urged him to commit a sinful act.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This covetousness is a powerful enemy; it is always unholy and odious. See! Its influence has overpowered the Maharṣi Kaśyapa and has tied him down to an ordinary affection and has urged him to commit a sinful act.

[Ch 3 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Prajāpati Brahmā, to preserve and keep the prestige in the name of Justice and Religion, cursed his own very dear grandson Kaśyapa, the best of the Munis, and said: "Go to the earth in your Aṃśa, and take your birth in the Yadu clan, be united with your wives and work as a Cowherd."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Prajāpati Brahmā, to preserve and keep the prestige in the name of Justice and Religion, cursed his own very dear grandson Kaśyapa, the best of the Munis, and said :-- Go to the earth in your Aṃśa, and take your birth in the Yadu clan, be united with your wives and work as a Cowherd.

[Ch 3 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Thus was cursed the Maharṣi Kaśyapa by Brahmā and Varuna to come down to the earth as Anśāvatāra to relieve the earth of her burden.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Thus was cursed the Maharṣi Kaśyapa by Brahmā and Varuṇa to come down to the earth as Amsā Vatāra to relieve the earth of her burden.

[Ch 3 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Diti, too, becoming grieved much with sorrows, cursed Aditi that seven of her sons would be killed consecutively after their births.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Diti, too, becoming grieved much with sorrows, cursed Aditi that seven of her sons would be killed consecutively after their births.

[Ch 3 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya said: O best of Munis! Why was it that Diti so cruelly cursed his sister Aditi, the mother of Indra? Kindly explain to me the cause of this and oblige. I am sorry to hear of this curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya said :-- O best of Munis! Why was it that Diti so cruelly cursed his sister Aditi, the mother of Indra? Kindly explain to me the cause of this and oblige. I am sorry to hear of this curse.

[Ch 3 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Thus asked by the son of Parksit, Vyāsa, the son of Satyavati, himself replied to the king about their cause in the following words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Thus asked by the son of Parikṣit, Vyāsa, the son of Satyabatī, himself replied to the king about their causes in the following words :--

[Ch 3 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Dakṣa Prajāpati had two daughters, Diti and Aditi; these two, of high rank, were married to Kāśyapa; and they were his favourites.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Dakṣa Prajāpati had two daughters, Diti and Aditi; these two, of high rank, were married to Kaśyapa; and they were his favourites.

[Ch 3 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Aditi gave birth to the very powerful Indra, the king of the Devas. Diti, too, asked for a son of the same strength, prowess, and splendour as those of Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Aditi gave birth to the very powerful Indra, the king of the Devas. Diti, too, asked for a son of the same strength, prowess, and splendour as those of Indra.

[Ch 3 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Diti, of beautiful dark blue eyes, entreated to her husband and said, "Give me a son, O giver of due respects to every body! who shall be a hero as strong as Indra, religious and of indomitable energy."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Diti, of beautiful dark blue eyes, entreated to her husband and said, “Give me a son, O giver of due respects to every body! who shall be a hero as strong as Indra, religious and of indomitable energy.”

[Ch 3 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni said to her: "O Dear! Be peaceful; I advise you to take a vow, practise a rite, and when the period of your practice will be over, you will get a son like Indra."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni said to her :-- O Dear! Be peaceful; I advise you to take a vow, practise a rite, and when the period of your practice will be over, you will get a son like Indra.

[Ch 3 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Diti promised to act according to his word and took an oath; and when she practised the vow, Maharṣi Kāśyapa impregnated the seed in her womb, Diti also bore the seed in her womb according to the usual rite.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Diti promised to act according to his word and took an oath; and when she practised the vow, Maharṣi Kaśyapa impregnated the seed in her womb. Diti also bore the seed in her womb according to the usual rite.

[Ch 3 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The excellent fair complexioned Diti remained sacred, observed all the rules and, deeply intent on her vow, subsisted only on milk and slept on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The excellent fair complexioned Diti remained sacred, observed all the rules and, deeply intent on her vow, subsisted only on milk and slept or the ground.

[Ch 3 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when the foetus was fully developed, Diti began to look white and full of splendonr. On seeing her thus, Aditi became anxious and thought if there be born of Diti a son like the powerful Indra, then my son will no doubt be deprived of his brilliance and splendour.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when the foetus was fully developed, Diti began to look white and full of splendour. On seeing her thus, Aditi became anxious and thought if there be born of Diti a son like the powerful Indra, then my son will no doubt be deprived of his brilliancy and splendour.

[Ch 3 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The proud Aditi, thinking thus, said to Indra: "O Son! There, in the womb of Diti, is your powerful enemy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The proud Aditi, thinking thus, said to Indra :-- O Son! There, in the womb of Diti, is your powerful enemy.

[Ch 3 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Even now think out how you can kill your enemy. Before the child is born of the womb, try to destroy it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beautiful One! Even now think out how you can kill your enemy. Before the child is born of the womb, try to destroy it.

[Ch 3 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Since the time I have looked on my co-wife Diti, of beautiful eyes and proud, this is the one and only thought that troubles the peace in the innermost of my hearts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Since the time I have looked, on my co-wife Diti, of beautiful eyes and proud, this is the one and only thought that troubles the peace in the innermost of my hearts.

[Ch 3 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The enemy, if he firmly gets hold like a fully developed consumption, cannot be killed; therefore the intelligent persons should destroy their enemies, when they are in their bud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The enemy, if he firmly gets hold like a fully developed consumption, cannot be killed; therefore the intelligent persons should destroy the enemies, when they are in their buds.

[Ch 3 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Śatakratu! My heart is being pierced wholly by an iron spoke when I see the womb of Diti; kill it by any means you can!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Śatakratu! My heart is being pierced wholly by an iron spoke when I see the womb of Diti; kill it by any means you can!

[Ch 3 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O High minded One! If you wish my welfare, then destroy the foetus, in the womb of Diti, by any of the existent means, Sāma, Dāna or strength and thus remove the cause of grief in my heart."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O High minded One! If you like my welfare, then destroy the foetus, in the womb of Diti, by any of the existent means, Sāma, Dāna or strength and thus remove the cause of grief in my heart.

[Ch 3 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing his mother, Indra, the King of the Immortals, thought over all the means and went then to his step-mother Diti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing his mother, Indra, the King of the Immortals, thought over all the means and went then to his step-mother Diti.

[Ch 3 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That evil minded Indra bowed down at the foot of Diti with humility and addressed her with words, sweet but full of poison.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That evil minded Indra bowed down at the foot of Diti with humility and addressed her with words, sweet but full of poison.

[Ch 3 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O mother! You have become very weak, lean and thin in the practise of your vow. I have come to serve you; order me now what I can do for you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O mother! You have become very weak, lean and thin in the practise your vow. I have come to serve you; order me now what I can do for you.

[Ch 3 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O chaste one to your husband! I want to shampoo your feet. To serve one's Guru means to earn righteousness and immortality.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O chaste one to your husband! I want to shampoo your feet. To serve one’s Guru means to earn righteousness and immortality.

[Ch 3 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O mother! I swear, on oath, I don't make any difference between you and my mother Aditi." Saying thus, he touched her feet and began to shampoo her legs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O mother! I swear, on oath, I don’t make any difference between you and my mother Aditi. Saying thus, he touched her feet and began to shampoo her legs.

[Ch 3 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beautiful eyed Diti, tired of the vow, lean and thin, thus being shampooed and having full faith in Indra's words, fell to deep sleep.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beautiful eyed Diti, tired of the vow, lean and thin, thus being shampooed and having full faith in Indra’s words, fell to deep sleep.

[Ch 3 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing her asleep, Indra, with thunderbolt in his hand, took his subtle form and by the influence of his yogic power, entered carefully into her womb quickly and cut asunder the foetus in the womb into seven parts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing her asleep, Indra, with thunderbolt in his hand, took subtle form and by the influence of his yogic power, entered carefully into her womb quickly and cut asunder the foetus in the womb into seven parts.

[Ch 3 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The child in the womb, struck by the thunder bolt, cried out. Indra spoke to the child gently: "Do not cry," and in the mean while cut each of the seven parts into seven parts again. Thus, O king! The forty-nine Maruts were born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The child in the womb, struck by the thunder bolt, cried out. Indra spoke to the child gently :-- “Do not cry,” and in the mean while cut each of the seven parts into seven parts again. Thus, O king! The forty-nine Maruts were born.

[Ch 3 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the good natured Diti awoke, she came to know that Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb and became very sorry and angry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the good natured Diti awoke, she came to know that Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb and became very sorry and angry.

[Ch 3 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing that all these treacherous acts are really done under the advice of her sister, the truthful Diti; who was under the vow, cursed Aditi, and Indra, saying that as her son Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb, Indra's kingdom over the three worlds would be destroyed.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing that all these treacherous acts are really done under the advice of her sister, the truthful Diti; who was under the vow, cursed Aditi, and Indra, saying that as her son Indra has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb, Indra’s kingdom over the three worlds would be destroyed.

[Ch 3 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And as the sinful Aditi has secretly caused the destruction of my son, her sons, too, would also die after their birth consecutively and she would dwell in the prison house in much trouble and anxiety and would also bear still born sons in her next birth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And as the sinful Aditi has secretly caused the destruction of my son, her sons, too, would also die after their birth consecutively and she would dwell in the prison house in much trouble and anxiety and would also bear still born sons in her next birth.

[Ch 3 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Maharṣi Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, hearing the curse, allayed her anger with loving words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Maharṣi Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, hearing the curse, allayed her anger with loving words.

[Ch 3 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Blessed One! Do not be angry. Your sons would all become very powerful and would be called Maruts. They would be companions and friends to Indra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Blessed One! Do not be angry. Your sons would all become very powerful and would be called Maruts. They would be companions and friends to Indra.

[Ch 3 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Dear! Your curse won't be fruitless; in the 28th Manvantara, at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, your curse will bear fruit. Then Aditi, sinful for her jealousy and anger, will go down on earth to take the human birth through her Anīsa (part) and suffer according to your curse.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Dear! Your curse won’t be fruitless; in the 28th Manvantara, at the end of the Dvāpara Yuga, your curse will bear fruit. Then Aditi, sinful for her jealousy and anger, will go down on earth to take the human birth through her Amsa (part) and suffer according to your curse.

[Ch 3 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Varuna, too, had become very grieved and cursed her. And, due to both these curses, this Aditi will be born as a woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Varuṇa, too, had become very grieved and cursed her. And, due to both these curses, this Aditi will be born as a woman.

[Ch 3 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The fair complexioned Diti, thus consoled by her husband, became glad and did not utter any more unpleasant words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The fair complexioned Diti, thus consoled by her husband, became glad and did not utter any more unpleasant words.

[Ch 3 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Thus I have narrated to you the cause of the previous curse. O best of kings! Thus Aditi was born as Devakī out of her Anísā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus I have narrated to you the cause of the previous curse. O best of kings! Thus Aditi was born as Devakī out of her Aṃśa.

[Ch 3 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purānam Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses on the former curse of Vasudeva and Devakī by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Here ends the third Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses on the former curse of Vasudeva and Devakī by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
