CHAPTER XII

On the Birth of Ästika

सूत उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तस्य व्यास: सत्यवतीसुतः ।

उवाच वचनं तत सभायां नृपति च तम् ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Hearing these words of the king, Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavati addressed to him before the assembly, thus:

व्यास उवाच

भृणु राजनप्रव्यामि पुराणं गुहामद्धुतम् ।

पुर्णं भागवतं नाम नानाख्यानयुतं शिधा ॥ 2 ॥

"O king! I am now reciting to you a Bhāgavata Purāna, holy, wonderful, filled with many anecdotes, and leading to auspicious results; listen.

अध्यायितं मवा पूर्वं शुक्रायासमुताव ये ।

श्रावयामि नृप त्वां हि रहस्यं परमं मम ॥ 3 ॥

Before, I made my son Suka study this Purāṇa; O king! I will now recite before you that highest Purāṇa; with all the secrets contained therein.

धार्मिकामभोक्षाणां कारणां श्रवणान्तिकल ।

गृषपं सुखदं नितयं सर्वागमममुद्धुतम् ॥ 4 ॥

I have extracted this from all the Agamas; it brings in Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth), Kama (fructification of desires) and Moksa (liberation); hearing this gives always happiness and good results."

जनमेव जय जवाच

आस्तीकोदयं सुतः कस्य विदार्थ बक्यामातः ।

प्रयोजनं किम्बितास्य सर्पणां रक्षणे प्रभो ॥ 5 ॥

कथवैतनमहाभाग विस्तरणे कथानकम् ।

पुराणं च तथा सर्व विस्तराद्र सुजत ॥ 6 ॥

At this Janamejaya said: “O Lord! Whose son is this Muni Āstika? Why did he come as an obstacle in my Sarpa Yajñā (sacrifice of snakes)? And what object had he in preserving the snakes? O highly fortunate one! Kindly describe all this in

detail; after this recite that Purāṇa, also, in detail to me."

व्यास उवाच

जरत्कासूंपि: शान्तो न चकार गृहाश्रमम् ।

तेन दृष्टा वने गर्ते लंबवामना: स्वपूर्वतः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa Deva said: “O king! In former days there lived a Muni named Jaratikāru. He always remained in the path of peace; and he did not marry. Once he saw, in a cave in a forest, his fathers and forefathers pendant.

तत्समाहुः कुर पुरा द्वान्

यथा च नः स्यात्यमा हि तृति: ।

स्वर्गं जमामः खलु दुःखमुक्ता

वयं सदाचारायुते सुते नै ॥ 8 ॥

They spoke to Jaratkāru thus: “O son! marry; we will thereby be greatly pleased; if there be a son of good character born to you, we all will be freed from all troubles and we would then be able to go to Heavens.”

स तनुवाचाध लभे समानाम-

याचितां चातिवर्जानुगां च ।

तदा गृहारभमहं कृतोमि

ब्रतीम तथं मपूर्वांत वै ॥ 9 ॥

Hearing this Jaratkāru said: “O Forefathers! If I get a girl of my name, without begging and asking and if she be entirely obedient to me, I will marry and lead a householder’s life; thus I have spoken truly to you.”

इत्युक्चना तात्ररात्कारनंतरतीर्थ-प्रति हिजः ।

तथैव प्रवगा: शाला मात्राउनरी तिपर्वतिचिति ॥ 10 ॥

Thus saying to his forefathers, Jaratkāru went on to the holy places. Now it happened so, that at that very time Kadru, the mother of snakes cursed her sons, saying “May you be burnt by fire.”

कश्यपस्य मुने: पत्नी ककूषु श्विनता तथा ।

दूद्वात्रशद्वलयो घाघुमचतुघ परस्पतम् ॥ १ १  ॥

The matters of this incident run as follows: “At that moment Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives of Káśyapa saw the horses yoked in the chariot of the sun and thus argued with each other:

तं दूद्वा च तदा कटूर्विनतामिदमब्रवीत् ।

किंबणोंदंह हयो भरे सत्यं प्रवृहि माधिचरम् ॥ १ २ ॥

Kadru, seeing the sun's horse, first asked Vinatā "O good one! Tell me soon, what is the color of this horse?"

विनतोबाच

छेत एवाघगजोरयं किं वा लं मन्यसे रुषे ।

ब्रृहि वर्णं त्वायम्यस्त ततस्तु विषणावहे ॥ 13 ॥

Vinatā said: “O auspicious one! What do you think?” I said, ‘the colour of the horse is white; you also better say beforehand what is its colour?’ We will then lay a wager (and challenge).”

कटूबाच

कृष्णावर्णमंत्र मन्ये हयमेनं शृष्णिस्मते ।

एहि सार्थ मया दिख्यं दासीभावाय भामिनी ॥ 14 ॥

Kadru said: “O smiling one! I think the horse is black. Now come; let us challenge; whoever will be defeated will become the slave of the other.”

सूत उवाच

ककुछ्य स्वसुतानाह सर्वान्याय्वेग स्थितान् ।

बालान् श्यामान्यकुवंतु यावतो३धागरीके ॥ 15 ॥

Thus saying, Kadru told her sons that were obedient: "Cover by your bodies all the pores of the body of the horse of the chariot of the Sun, so it may look black; go and do it."

नेति केचन ताजहुस्तान्यसाँ शरणार ह ।

जनमेवजयस्य घवे वे गमिथव्य हुताशनम् ॥ 16 ॥

At this some snakes replied: "That cannot be." Kadru then cursed them saying: "Let you fall on the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya."

अन्य चकुर्हंव सर्पा: ककुर्ं वर्णभोगकः ।

वेधत्याजस्य पुच्छे तु मातु: प्रियचिकीया ॥ 17 ॥

Then the other snakes tried to please their mother and coiled round the back of that horse so that the horse began to look black.

भगीर्यो च सुसंयुक्ते गला दुर्भगतुहंम् ।

काईं ते हयं दुर्घा विनता चातिदुःशिता ॥ 18 ॥

Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives went together and saw the horse. Vinatā saw it black and became very sorry.

तदा०३जगाम गकड़: सुतनस्तव्या महाबल: ।

स दृष्ट्या मातरं दीनामपूच्छत्यत्रागगानः ॥ १९ ॥

Now, Garudā, Vinatā's son, very powerful and devourer of snakes was passing that way and seeing his mother very distressed asked her:

मातः कबं सुदीनासि स हदितेव विभासि मे ।

जीवानेने माये सुते तथास्ये चैवसारथे ॥ 20 ॥

“O Mother! Why do you look so very sorry? It seems as if you are weeping. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun and I myself are your two sons living.

दु:लितासि ततो वां तिर्जीवितं चाफलोचने ।

किं जातेन सुतेनाथ यदि माता सुड़:खिता ॥ 21 ॥

गंस मे कारणं माता: कंजीय विगतज्ञायम् ।

Fie to us that, while we are living, you will have to suffer pains. O beautiful one! If mother suffers while the son is living, then what use is there in having such a son? So, O Mother, give out the cause of your grief and I will remove it at once."

विनतोवाच

सपल्या दास्यई पुर किं कवीमि वृथा क्षता ॥ 22 ॥

वह मां सा ब्रवीत्यद तेनासि मुः द्विता सुत ।

Hearing this Vinatā said: “O son! What shall I say to you of my misery; I am now become the slave of my rival wife. By some pretext she defeated me and is now telling me to carry her on my back. O son! For this reason I am sorry.”

गरड उवाच

बहिष्येई त्रत किलि चर सा गन्तुत्सुका ॥ 23 ॥

मा शोकें कुरू कल्याणि निर्धितां त्वां कौरोम्बहम् ।

Hearing these words of the mother, Garuda said: "Very well I will carry her on my shoulders where ever she wishes to go. O auspicious one! You need not be sorry; I will remove all your cares."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्ता सा गता पार्श्ध कंडोश्व विनता तदा ॥ 24 ॥

दारसीभावमपाकर्तु गरकौउपि माढालयः ।

Vyāsa Deva said: Thus spoken to by Garuda, Vinatā went to Kadru. At that time the highly powerful Garuda went there also to free his mother

of her slavery and carried Kadru with all her sons on his back to the other side of the ocean.

उदाह ततं सुचंत्रा वै सिंधोः पारं जगाम ह ॥ 25 ॥

गत्वा तां गरूक प्राह बूहिं मालन्मोज्यु ते ।

कर्थ मुच्छेत मे माता दारीभावादंशयम् ॥ 26 ॥

When Garuda went across the ocean, Garuda spoke to Kadru: "O mother! I bow down to thee; kindly say how my mother can be freed of your slavery."

कूकृत्वाच

अभृतं देवलोकाच्चं वलावतानीय मे सुतान् ।

समपर्य सुत्ताथगु मातरं मोचयावलाम् ॥ 27 ॥

Hearing this Kadru said: "O son! If you can bring today by your sheer force nectar from the Devaloka and give it to my sons, then you will be able to free your helpless mother."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्तः प्रययो रीणमिंग्रतोकं महावलः ।

कृत्वा युद्धं जहागुः सुधाकुभ्यं खतोगतः ॥ 28 ॥

समानीयागृते मात्रे वैनतेवः समयपंत् ।

भोक्तिता विनता तेन दासीभावादर्शभयम् ॥ 29 ॥

When Kadru said so, the highly powerful Vinatā's son, Garuda immediately went to the abode of Indra and fighting hard, stole away the jar of nectar and brought and gave it to Kadru and freed his mother Vinatā from the slavery of Kadru.

अभृत संजहारंद्रः स्नातुं सपां यदा गता: ।

दारीभावाद्विनिभूंका विनता विपर्पेबल्नत् ॥ ३० ॥

In the meantime, the snakes went for their bath, after which they would drink the nectar. Indra stole away that jar which contained nectar. O king! Thus, by the sheer strength of arms of Garuda Vinatā was freed of her slavery.

तत्रास्तीणीः कुशास्तैसु लीक्षा: पत्रगनामकैः ।

द्विजिछाने सुसंपश्रा: कुणाध्यम्यंगितः ॥ ३१ ॥

On the other hand, when the snakes returned from their bath and found that there was no jar of nectar, they began to lick the kuśa grass over which the jar of nectar was kept, thinking that they would

thereby get some drops of nectar which might have trickled over; and the result was that by the sharp edges of kuśa grasses, the tongues of all snakes were cut asunder into two; hence the snakes are called Dvijjhvā."

मात्रा: शताङ्ग ये नागा वासुकिपमुखा: शुना।

ब्रह्माणा शरणां गावता ते होचुः: शापजं भयम् ॥ 32 ॥

तानाह भगवान्बह्ञा जरत्काभर्महामुपिनः ।

वासुकंभरितीं तस्ये अर्थायंस्त सनापिकाम् ॥ 33 ॥

तस्वयं यो जायते पुःः स वस्त्रात भविष्यति ।

आस्तीक इति नामासौ भविता नाम संशया: ॥ 34 ॥

The snake Vāsuki and others, whom Kadru, the mother of snakes, cursed, went to Brahmā and took his refuge and informed all of the cause of their terror, the curse from their mother; when Brahmā spoke to them: “Go and give the sister of Vāsuki, named Jaratkāru, in marriage to the great Muni Jarat Kāru, (both of the same name). In her womb, a son named Āstīka will be born; and he will certainly deliver you from you difficulties.

वासुकिंस्तु तदाकमर्थे बचनं ब्रहणा: शिवम् ।

वनं गत्वा सुतां तस्मै ददौ विवयवृक्कम् ॥ 35 ॥

समानां तां मुनिज्ञाला जरताकारुकचा तम् ।

अधियं मे यदा कुयर्भिता तां संख्याम्यम्बृम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hearing these beneficial words of Brāhmaṇa, Vāsuki went to the forest and requested humbly the great Muni Jarat Kāru to accept in marriage her own sister when the Muni, knowing the girl to be of his name, spoke out thus: "But when your sister will act against my wishes, I will forsake her at once."

वायक्यं तादुर्गं कृता युनिज्ञाहु तां स्वयम् ।

दत्वा च वायुकि: कामा घनवं स्वं जगाम ह । ३ ७ ॥

Under these conditions, the Muni married her. And Väsuki, after giving her sister in marriage according to her own wishes to the Muni, returned to her own abode.

कृत्वा परिकुर्दी गृभां जरकारकमहावरे ।

तथा सह सुखं प्राप समागण: पत्नतः ॥ 38 ॥

O Tormentor of foes! Then the Muni Jaratkāru

built a white hut of leaves in that great forest and began to pass his days happily in enjoyment with his wife.

एकादा भोजनं कृत्वा सुतोउरी मुनिस्तमः ।

भगिनी वासुकेनरा संस्थिता वरवर्गिनी ॥ 39 ॥

न सबोधीयतख्योड़ं त्वया कानते कंधेचन ।

इन्युक्तन्तुगतोनिद्रामुनितसंमुदतीतदा ॥ 40 ॥

रविसतारीरिंगत: संयेमाकाल उपस्थिते ।

Once, on an occasion, after he had taken his dinner he slept and told his wife not to awaken him under any circumstances and fell fast asleep. The beautiful sister of Vāsuki sat by his side. When the evening time came and the sun began to set, the Vāsuki's sister Jaratkāru became afraid at the thought that the evening Sandhyā might not be performed by the Muni and thought thus:

किं कौरोय ने ग़णान्तस्येजनां बोधत:पुन: ॥ 41 ॥

धर्मोपभयातीत जतकास्त्रवित्यत् ।

नोचेद्वयोथायने संधाकालो वृधा जन्ते ॥ 42 ॥

“What am I to do now? My heart finds not rest if I do not awaken him; and if awaken him, he will forsake me at once. Now if I do not awaken him, the evening will pass away to no purpose.

धर्मनाग्रातं व्यानास्वाधि मरणं धुवम् ।

धर्मातिनिराणां हि नराकाय भवेतुतः ॥ 43 ॥

Whatever it be, if he quits me or if my death ensues, that is better than the non-observance of Dharma; for when Dharma is destroyed, hell ensues.

इति संस्धित्य सा बाला ते मुनि प्रयबोधयत् ।

संध्याकालोउपि संज्ञात उत्त्रधोत्तिश सुझत ॥ 44 ॥

अखितोउसी मुनि: कोपत्तामुवाच बजामयहम् ।

त्वं तु भातुगृहं याहि निर्वादिष्छेदकारिणी ॥ 45 ॥

Thus thinking, the girl awakened him saying: "O One of good vows! It is evening time; so get up; etc.!" The Muni got up in great anger and addressed his wife: "When you have disturbed my sleep, I now go away from you; you also better go to your brother's house."

वेयमानाज्ववीत्राव्यमित्यृष्ठा मुनीना तदा ।

भ्राजा दत्ता तदर्थं तत्कर्थ व्यादिमतप्रभा ॥ 46 ॥

When the Muni said so, Vāsuki's sister spoke out, trembling: "O One of indomitable lustre! How will the object be served for which my brother has given me in marriage with you."

युनि: प्राह जरकाकं तदसतीति निराकुलः ।

गता सा युनिना त्यक्ता वायुकः सदतं तथा ॥ 47 ॥

The Muni then spoke firmly to his wife Jaratkāru: “That is within your womb.” Jaratkāru then, forsaken by the Muni, went to the abode of Vāsuki.

पूषा धागाउत्रबीढ़ावयं यथोक्तं पतिना तदा ।

अस्तीतुब्बता च हित्या मां गतोजीय भूनिसम्भः ॥ 48 ॥

When her brother Vāsuki asked her about her son, she said: "The Muni has forsaken me, saying that the son is within your womb."

वायुकित्नु ततदाकपर्य सत्यवाड्युपनिरित्युत ।

विश्वासं च परं कृत्वा भागितों तो मास्धाश्त् ॥ ४ ९ ॥

ततः कालेन किंवाता जातोजी सुनिवालकः ।

आस्तीक इति नामाउसी विश्यातः कुकसत्तम ॥ ५० ॥

At this Vāsuki trusted; and said: "The Muni won't ever tell lies" and gave shelter to his sister. O Kurusattama! After some time, a famous boy named the Muni Āstika was born.

तेनारं रक्षितो यज्ञतव पार्थिवसत्ता ।

भातुपक्षस्य रक्षार्थे मुनिना भावितात्मना ॥ ५१ ॥

O King! That Muni boy, the knower of truth, had desisted you from your sacrifice of snakes for the preservation of his mother's family.

भयं कुत महाराज मानितोरंच त्वया मुनि: ।

यायावरकुलोत्यत्रो वासुकैभर्शिनीसुनु: ॥ ५२ ॥

It is well and good, befitting you, that you respected the words of the Muni Āstika, born of Yāyāvara family and the cousin of Vāsuki.

स्वस्ति तैरसु महाबाहो भारत सकलें कुतम् ।

दानानि बहु दत्तानि पृजिता मुनयस्तथा ॥ ५३ ॥

O Mighty-armed! Let all auspiciousness come to you; you have heard the whole Mahābhārata and gave away lots of things in charities. You have worshipped innumerable Munis.

कृतेन सुकृतेनापि न चिता स्वर्गितं गतः ।

पार्वितं नः कुलं कृत्वेनं त्वया भूपतिसत्तम ॥ 5 4 ॥

But, O king! Though you have done so many good things, yet your father has not attained heaven and you have not been able to sanctify your family.

देत्याक्षायतनं भूप विस्तीणं कुक भक्तिः ।

येन वै सकला सिंद्रिक्तव स्याजनमेवेन ॥ 55 ॥

पूजिता परया भक्त्या शिवा सकलादा सदा ।

कुलवृष्टिं करोलेव राज्यं च सृष्टियं सदा ॥ 56 ॥

So, O king Janamejaya! Now install a capacious temple of the Devi with the highest devotion; then all your desires will be fulfilled. The all auspicious Devi, the Giver of all desires, makes the kingdoms more stable and increases the family, if She be always worshipped with the highest devotion.

देवीयसूढ विधानेन कृत्वा पार्थिवसरम ।

श्रीमद्धारावतं नाम पुराणं परसं शृणु ॥ 57 ॥

O King! You better perform duly the Devīmakha Yajña Yotiṣoma and others, pleasing to the Devi, and hear the great Purāna Srimaddevī Bhāgavatam, filled with accounts of the glorious deeds of the Devi.

त्यामहं शाखियध्यामी कवां परमपावनीम् ।

संसारातिरिणी दिव्यां नानारससमाहतान् ॥ 58 ॥

I will make you hear now that Divine Purāṇa, filled with various sentiments, highly sanctifying and capable to carry one across this ocean of world.

न श्रोतव्यं परं चासामातुगणाद्धते भूवि ।

नाराध्यं दिवते राजन्देवीपादाम्बुजात् ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is no other subject in this world worthy to be heard than the above Purāṇa and there is no other thing to be worshipped than the lotus feet of the Devi.

ते सभायाः कृतप्रज्ञ ध्यायते नृपसत्ति ।

येषां चित्ते सदा देवौ बस्ति प्रेमसंकुले ॥ 60 ॥

O king! Those are certainly fortunate, those are intelligent and blessed, in whose hearts of love and devotion reigns always the Devi Bhagavatī.

सुडुःवित्ताने इय्यते भृवि भातत भाते ।

नाराधिता महाभाया वैजैनैशु सदग्रविक्षा ॥ 61 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O illustrious scion of Bharata's family! Know them to be always afflicted with troubles who do not worship in this world the great Mother Mahāmāyā.

ब्रहादाव: सुरा: सर्वे चदाराधनतत्वा: ।

वर्तैत सर्वदा रासंस्तां न सेवेत को जनः ॥ 62 ॥

O king! Who is there that will not worship Her when Brahmā and all the Devas are always engaged in Her devotional service.

य इदं रुण्याप्रिक्त्यं सर्वी-कामानवादपुयात् ।

भगवत्या समाख्यानं विश्वाये यदनुतमम् ॥ 6 3 ॥

O king! He who hears always this Purāna gets all his desires fulfilled; in former days, Bhagavatī Herself spoke this excellent Purāna to Viṣṇu.

तेन श्रुतेन ते राजधित्रे शान्तिभंचिष्यति ।

प्रिनुणां चाक्षसः स्वर्गः पुराणब्रवणाद्ध्वेते ॥ 64 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकन्चे

शोष्रवन्दुपसंगों नाम द्वारवो3थाय: ॥ 65 ॥

द्वार्षिणत्यधिकमकुईये: घष्टी: सरकारते.शुभे: ।

श्रीमहावासयुखोर्जीतीद्वितीय: स्कन्ध्य इंरित: ॥ 66 ॥

समाप्तोयं द्वितीयः स्कन्धः ।

O king! Your heart will be appeased and become peaceful when you hear this; and, as a result of your hearing this Purānam, all your ancestors will attain endless Heavenly life."

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Book

on the birth of Aśtika in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Here ends as well the Second Skandha.

***