[Ch 12 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sūta said: Hearing these words of the king, Vyāsa Deva, the son of Satyavati addressed to him before the assembly, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sūta said :-- Hearing these words of the king, Vyāsa Deva, the son Satyavatī addressed to him before the assembly, thus :--

[Ch 12 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O king! I am now reciting to you a Bhāgavata Purāna, holy, wonderful, filled with many anecdotes, and leading to auspicious results; listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O king! I am now reciting to you a Bhāgavata Purāṇa, holy, wonderful, filled with many anecdotes, and leading to auspicious results; listen.

[Ch 12 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Before, I made my son Suka study this Purāṇa; O king! I will now recite before you that highest Purāṇa; with all the secrets contained therein.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Before I made my son Śuka study this Purāṇa; O king! I will now recite before you that highest Purāṇa, with all the secrets contained therein.

[Ch 12 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have extracted this from all the Agamas; it brings in Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth), Kama (fructification of desires) and Moksa (liberation); hearing this gives always happiness and good results."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have extracted this from all the Āgamas; it brings in Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth), Kāma (fructification of desires) and Mokṣa (liberation); hearing this gives always happiness and good results.

[Ch 12 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Janamejaya said: “O Lord! Whose son is this Muni Āstika? Why did he come as an obstacle in my Sarpa Yajñā (sacrifice of snakes)? And what object had he in preserving the snakes? O highly fortunate one! Kindly describe all this in detail; after this recite that Purāṇa, also, in detail to me."
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Janamejaya said :-- “O Lord! Whose son is this Muni Āstika? Why did he come as an obstacle in my Sarpa Yajña (sacrifice of snakes)? And what object had he in preserving the snakes? O highly fortunate one! Kindly describe all this in detail; after this recite the Purāṇa, also, in detail to me.”

[Ch 12 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva said: “O king! In former days there lived a Muni named Jaratikāru. He always remained in the path of peace; and he did not marry. Once he saw, in a cave in a forest, his fathers and forefathers pendant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva said :-- “O king! In former days there lived a Muni named Jaratkāru. He always remained in the path of peace; and did not marry. Once he saw, in a cave in a forest, his fathers and forefathers pendant.

[Ch 12 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They spoke to Jaratkāru thus: “O son! marry; we will thereby be greatly pleased; if there be a son of good character born to you, we all will be freed from all troubles and we would then be able to go to Heavens.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► They spoke to Jaratkāru thus :-- “O son! Marry; we will thereby be greatly pleased; if there be a son of good character born to you, we all will be freed from all troubles and we would then able to go to Heavens.”

[Ch 12 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this Jaratkāru said: “O Forefathers! If I get a girl of my name, without begging and asking and if she be entirely obedient to me, I will marry and lead a householder’s life; thus I have spoken truly to you.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this Jaratkāru said :-- “O Forefathers! If I get a girl of my name, without begging and asking and if she be entirely obedient to me, I will marry and lead a householder’s life; thus I have spoken truly to you.”

[Ch 12 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying to his forefathers, Jaratkāru went on to the holy places. Now it happened so, that at that very time Kadru, the mother of snakes cursed her sons, saying “May you be burnt by fire.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying to his forefathers, Jaratkāru went on tour to the holy places. Now it happened so, that at that very time Kadru, the mother of snakes cursed her sons, saying “May you be burnt by fire.”

[Ch 12 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The matters of this incident run as follows: “At that moment Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives of Káśyapa saw the horses yoked in the chariot of the sun and thus argued with each other:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The matters of this incident run as follows :-- “At that moment Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives of Kaśyapa saw the horses yoked in the chariot of the sun and thus argued with each other :--

[Ch 12 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kadru, seeing the sun's horse, first asked Vinatā "O good one! Tell me soon, what is the color of this horse?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kadru, seeing the sun’s horse, first asked Vinatā “O good one! Tell me soon, what is the colour of this horse?”

[Ch 12 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vinatā said: “O auspicious one! What do you think?” I said, ‘the colour of the horse is white; you also better say beforehand what is its colour?’ We will then lay a wager (and challenge).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vinatā said :-- “O auspicious one! What do you think?” I said, the colour of the horse is white; you also better say before hand what is its colour? We will then lay a wager (and challenge).

[Ch 12 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kadru said: “O smiling one! I think the horse is black. Now come; let us challenge; whoever will be defeated will become the slave of the other.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kadru said :-- “O Smiling one! I think the the horse is black. Now come; let us challenge; whoever will be defeated will become the slave of the other.”

[Ch 12 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Kadru told her sons that were obedient: "Cover by your bodies all the pores of the body of the horse of the chariot of the Sun, so it may look black; go and do it."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Kadru told her sons that were obedient :-- “Cover by your bodies all the pores of the body of the horse of the chariot of the Sun, so it may look black; go and do it.”

[Ch 12 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this some snakes replied: "That cannot be." Kadru then cursed them saying: "Let you fall on the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya."
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this some snakes replied “That cannot be.” Kadru then cursed them saying :-- “Let you fall on the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya.”

[Ch 12 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the other snakes tried to please their mother and coiled round the back of that horse so that the horse began to look black.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the other snakes tried to please their mother and coiled round the back of that horse so that the horse began to look black.

[Ch 12 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives went together and saw the horse. Vinatā saw it black and became very sorry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Kadru and Vinatā, the two co-wives went together and saw the horse. Vinatā saw it black and became very sorry.

[Ch 12 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now, Garudā, Vinatā's son, very powerful and devourer of snakes was passing that way and seeing his mother very distressed asked her:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now, Garuḍa, Vinatā’s son, very powerful and devourer of snakes was passing that way and seeing his mother very distressed asked her :--

[Ch 12 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Mother! Why do you look so very sorry? It seems as if you are weeping. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun and I myself are your two sons living.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Mother! Why do you look so very sorry? It seems as if you are weeping. Aruṇa, the charioteer of the Sun and I myself are your two sons living.

[Ch 12 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fie to us that, while we are living, you will have to suffer pains. O beautiful one! If mother suffers while the son is living, then what use is there in having such a son? So, O Mother, give out the cause of your grief and I will remove it at once."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fie to us that, while we are living, you will have to suffer pains. O beautiful one! If mother suffers while the son is living, then what use is there in having such a son? So, O Mother, give out the cause of your grief and I will remove it at once.”

[Ch 12 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this Vinatā said: “O son! What shall I say to you of my misery; I am now become the slave of my rival wife. By some pretext she defeated me and is now telling me to carry her on my back. O son! For this reason I am sorry.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this Vinatā said :-- “O son! What shall I say to you of my misery; I am now become the slave of my rival wife. By some pretext she defeated me and is now telling me to carry her on my back. O son! For this reason I am sorry.”

[Ch 12 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the mother, Garuda said: "Very well I will carry her on my shoulders where ever she wishes to go. O auspicious one! You need not be sorry; I will remove all your cares."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of the mother, Garuda said :-- “Very well I will carry her on my shoulders wherever she wishes to go. O auspicious one! You need not be sorry; I will remove all your cares.”

[Ch 12 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva said: Thus spoken to by Garuda, Vinatā went to Kadru. At that time the highly powerful Garuda went there also to free his mother of her slavery and carried Kadru with all her sons on his back to the other side of the ocean.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa Deva said :-- Thus spoken to by Garuḍa, Vinatā went to Kadru. At that time the highly powerful Garuḍa went there also to free his mother of her slavery and carried Kadru with all her sons on his back to the other side of the ocean.

[Ch 12 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Garuda went across the ocean, Garuda spoke to Kadru: "O mother! I bow down to thee; kindly say how my mother can be freed of your slavery."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Garuḍa went across the ocean, Garuḍa spoke to Kadru :-- “O mother! I bow down to thee; kindly say how my mother can be freed of your slavery.

[Ch 12 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this Kadru said: "O son! If you can bring today by your sheer force nectar from the Devaloka and give it to my sons, then you will be able to free your helpless mother."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this Kadru said :-- “O son! If you can bring to-day by your sheer force nectar from the Deva loka and give it to my sons then you will be able to free your helpless mother.

[Ch 12 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Kadru said so, the highly powerful Vinatā's son, Garuda immediately went to the abode of Indra and fighting hard, stole away the jar of nectar and brought and gave it to Kadru and freed his mother Vinatā from the slavery of Kadru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Kadru said so, the highly powerful Vinatā’s son, Garuḍa immediately went to the abode of Indra and, fighting hard, stole away the jar of nectar and brought and gave it to Kadru and freed his mother Vinatā from the slavery of Kadru.

[Ch 12 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the meantime, the snakes went for their bath, after which they would drink the nectar. Indra stole away that jar which contained nectar. O king! Thus, by the sheer strength of arms of Garuda Vinatā was freed of her slavery.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the meantime, the snakes went for their bath, after which they would drink the nectar. Indra stole away that jar which contained nectar. O king! Thus, by the sheer strength of arms of Garuḍa Vinatā was freed of her slavery.

[Ch 12 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the other hand, when the snakes returned from their bath and found that there was no jar of nectar, they began to lick the kuśa grass over which the jar of nectar was kept, thinking that they would thereby get some drops of nectar which might have trickled over; and the result was that by the sharp edges of kuśa grasses, the tongues of all snakes were cut asunder into two; hence the snakes are called Dvijjhvā."
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the other hand, when the snakes returned from their bath and found that there was no jar of nectar, they began to lick the Kuṣa grass over which the jar of nectar was kept, thinking that they would thereby get some drops of nectar which might have trickled over; and the result was that by the sharp edges of kuṣa grasses, the tongues of all the snakes were cut asunder into two; hence the snakes are called Dvijihva.

[Ch 12 Verse 32-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The snake Vāsuki and others, whom Kadru, the mother of snakes, cursed, went to Brahmā and took his refuge and informed all of the cause of their terror, the curse from their mother; when Brahmā spoke to them: “Go and give the sister of Vāsuki, named Jaratkāru, in marriage to the great Muni Jarat Kāru, (both of the same name). In her womb, a son named Āstīka will be born; and he will certainly deliver you from you difficulties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The snake Vāsuki and others, whom Kadru, the mother of snakes, cursed, went to Brahmā and took his refuge and informed all of the cause of their terror, the curse from their mother; when Brahmā spoke to them :-- “Go and give the sister of Vāsuki, named Jaratkāru, in marriage to the great Muni Jarat Kāru, (both of the same name). In her womb, a son named Āstika will be born; and he will certainly deliver you from your difficulties.

[Ch 12 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these beneficial words of Brāhmaṇa, Vāsuki went to the forest and requested humbly the great Muni Jarat Kāru to accept in marriage her own sister when the Muni, knowing the girl to be of his name, spoke out thus: "But when your sister will act against my wishes, I will forsake her at once."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing those beneficial words of Brahmā, Vāsuki went to the forest and requested humbly the great Muni Jarat Kāru to accept in marriage her own sister when the Muni, knowing the girl to be of his name, spoke out thus :-- “But when your sister will act against my wishes, I will forsake her at once.”

[Ch 12 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Under these conditions, the Muni married her. And Väsuki, after giving her sister in marriage according to her own wishes to the Muni, returned to her own abode.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Under these conditions, the Muni married her. And Vāsuki, after giving her sister in marriage according to her own wishes to the Muni, returned to

[Ch 12 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Tormentor of foes! Then the Muni Jaratkāru built a white hut of leaves in that great forest and began to pass his days happily in enjoyment with his wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Tormentor of foes! Then the Muni Jaratkāru built a white hut of leaves in that great forest and began to pass his days happily in enjoyment with his wife.

[Ch 12 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, after he had taken his dinner he slept and told his wife not to awaken him under any circumstances and fell fast asleep. The beautiful sister of Vāsuki sat by his side. When the evening time came and the sun began to set, the Vāsuki's sister Jaratkāru became afraid at the thought that the evening Sandhyā might not be performed by the Muni and thought thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Once, on an occasion, after he had taken his dinner he slept and told his wife not to awaken him under any circumstances and fell fast asleep. The beautiful sister of Vāsuki sat by his side. When the evening time came and the sun began to set, the Vāsuki’s sister Jaratkāru became afraid at the thought that the evening Sandhya might not be performed by the Muni and thought thus :--

[Ch 12 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “What am I to do now? My heart finds not rest if I do not awaken him; and if awaken him, he will forsake me at once. Now if I do not awaken him, the evening will pass away to no purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “What am I to do now? My heart finds not rest if I do not awaken him; and if I awaken him, he will forsake me at once. Now if I do not awaken him, the evening will pass away to no purpose.

[Ch 12 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever it be, if he quits me or if my death ensues, that is better than the non-observance of Dharma; for when Dharma is destroyed, hell ensues.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever it be, if he quits me or if my death ensues, that is better than the non-observance of Dharma; for when Dharma is destroyed, hell ensues.

[Ch 12 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the girl awakened him saying: "O One of good vows! It is evening time; so get up; etc.!" The Muni got up in great anger and addressed his wife: "When you have disturbed my sleep, I now go away from you; you also better go to your brother's house."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, the girl awakened him saying :-- “O One of good vows! It is evening time; so get up; etc.” The Muni got up in great anger and addressed his wife :-- “When you have disturbed my sleep, I now go away from you; you also better go to your brother’s house.”

[Ch 12 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Muni said so, Vāsuki's sister spoke out, trembling: "O One of indomitable lustre! How will the object be served for which my brother has given me in marriage with you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Muni said so, Vāsuki’s sister spoke out, trembling :-- “O One of indomitable lustre! How will the object be served for which my brother has given me in marriage with you.”

[Ch 12 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Muni then spoke firmly to his wife Jaratkāru: “That is within your womb.” Jaratkāru then, forsaken by the Muni, went to the abode of Vāsuki.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Muni then spoke firmly to his wife Jaratkāru :-- “That is within your womb.” Jaratkāru then, forsaken by the Muni, went to the abode of Vāsuki.

[Ch 12 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When her brother Vāsuki asked her about her son, she said: "The Muni has forsaken me, saying that the son is within your womb."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When her brother Vāsuki asked her about her son, she said :-- “The Muni has forsaken me, saying that the son is within your womb.”

[Ch 12 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Vāsuki trusted; and said: "The Muni won't ever tell lies" and gave shelter to his sister. O Kurusattama! After some time, a famous boy named the Muni Āstika was born.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Vāsuki trusted; and said :-- “The Muni won’t ever tell lies” and gave shelter to his sister. O Kurusattama! After some time, a famous boy named the Muni Āstika was born.

[Ch 12 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That Muni boy, the knower of truth, had desisted you from your sacrifice of snakes for the preservation of his mother's family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! That Muni boy, the knower of truth, had desisted you from your sacrifice of snakes for the preservation of his mother’s family.

[Ch 12 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is well and good, befitting you, that you respected the words of the Muni Āstika, born of Yāyāvara family and the cousin of Vāsuki.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is well and good, befitting you, that you respected the words of the Muni Āstika, born of Yāyāvara family and the cousin of Vāsuki.

[Ch 12 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mighty-armed! Let all auspiciousness come to you; you have heard the whole Mahābhārata and gave away lots of things in charities. You have worshipped innumerable Munis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mighty-armed! Let all auspiciousness come to you; you have heard the whole Mahābhārata and gave away lots of things in charities. You have worshipped innumerable Munis.

[Ch 12 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But, O king! Though you have done so many good things, yet your father has not attained heaven and you have not been able to sanctify your family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But, O king! Though you have done so many good things, yet your father has not attained heaven and you have not been able to sanctify your family.

[Ch 12 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O king Janamejaya! Now install a capacious temple of the Devi with the highest devotion; then all your desires will be fulfilled. The all auspicious Devi, the Giver of all desires, makes the kingdoms more stable and increases the family, if She be always worshipped with the highest devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O king Janamejaya! Now install a capacious temple of the Devī with the highest devotion; then all your desires will be fulfilled. The all auspicious Devī, the Giver of all desires, makes the kingdoms more stable and increases the family, if She be always worshipped with the highest devotion.

[Ch 12 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You better perform duly the Devīmakha Yajña Yotiṣoma and others, pleasing to the Devi, and hear the great Purāna Srimaddevī Bhāgavatam, filled with accounts of the glorious deeds of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! You better perform duly the Devīmakha Yajña Yotiṣṭoma and others, pleasing to the Devī, and hear the great Purāṇa Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam, filled with accounts of the glorious deeds of the Devī.

[Ch 12 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will make you hear now that Divine Purāṇa, filled with various sentiments, highly sanctifying and capable to carry one across this ocean of world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will make you hear now that Divine Purāṇa, filled with various sentiments, highly sanctifying and capable to carry one across this ocean of world.

[Ch 12 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There is no other subject in this world worthy to be heard than the above Purāṇa and there is no other thing to be worshipped than the lotus feet of the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! There is no other subject in this world worthy to be heard than the above Purāṇa and there is no other thing to be worshipped then the lotus feet of the Devī.

[Ch 12 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Those are certainly fortunate, those are intelligent and blessed, in whose hearts of love and devotion reigns always the Devi Bhagavatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Those are certainly fortunate, those are intelligent and blessed, in whose hearts of love and devotion reign always the Devī Bhagavatī.

[Ch 12 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O illustrious scion of Bharata's family! Know them to be always afflicted with troubles who do not worship in this world the great Mother Mahāmāyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O illustrious scion of Bharata’s family! Know them to the always afflicted with troubles who do not worship in this world the great Mother Mahāmāyā.

[Ch 12 Verse 62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Who is there that will not worship Her when Brahmā and all the Devas are always engaged in Her devotional service.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Who is there that will not worship Her when Brahmā and all the Devas are always engaged in Her devotional service.

[Ch 12 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! He who hears always this Purāna gets all his desires fulfilled; in former days, Bhagavatī Herself spoke this excellent Purāna to Viṣṇu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! He who hears always this Purāṇa gets all his desires fulfilled; in former days Bhagavatī Herself spoke this excellent Purāṇa to Viṣṇu.

[Ch 12 Verse 64-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Your heart will be appeased and become peaceful when you hear this; and, as a result of your hearing this Purānam, all your ancestors will attain endless Heavenly life." Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Book on the birth of Aśtika in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa. Here ends as well the Second Skandha. ***
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Your heart will be appeased and become peaceful when you hear this; and, as a result of your hearing this Purāṇam, all your ancestors will attain endless Heavenly life. Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of Āstika in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends as well the Second Book.
