CHAPTER XXV

On Dhūmralocana Killed

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्खा विरारामासी वचनं धूपतोचनः ।

प्रत्युवाच तटा काली प्रदस्य ललितं वचः ॥ १ ॥

विद्युक्सोसि जात्म लयं तैगतूय इव भापसे ।

दृषा मनोराखींशते कांपि मधुरं वदन् ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O Janamejaya! When Dhūmralocana ceased speaking, the Devi Kālikā made a wild laughter and began to speak sweetly thus: O Stupid! Skilled in flattery, you know only how to use jugglery of words like an actor; do you think that your ends will be served if you speak only sweet words; this can never be.

बलवाव्यलस्येषु: प्रेषितीप्स दुरामना ।

कुरु सुद्धे वृथा यादं मुंच मुक्रमतेधुना ॥ ३ ॥

O Stupid! Fight now; there is no need of useless words. You are strong and have been sent by that wicked Demon with a great army.

हत्वा रुष्यं निरुष्यं च त्वद्याव्याव वलाधिकान् ।

देवी कुंद्रा शराषातैर्जिष्यति निजालयम् ॥ 4 ॥

This Devi, out of wrath, will kill you, Šumbha, and Nisūmbha and other commanders by Her arrows and will then return to Her abode.

वसारी मंदपाति: शुभ्म: कव वा विध्यांगेति ।

असुकः खतुं संसारे विहाहित्धितेतः ॥ ५ ॥

Where is that stupid Sumbha? And where is this Devi, the Great Enchantress of the Universe! Their marriage in this world is entirely out of question and can never take place.

सिंही किं त्वितिकामाता जँबुक कुकते पतिम् ।

क्रिणी गर्दभे वापि गवयं सुरिधः क्रिपु ॥ ६ ॥

गच्छ शुभ्यं नित्यमं च वद सत्यं वयं चेम ।

कुक सुदूदं न चेघाड़ि पात्लां तस्पासंधुना ॥ ७ ॥

O Stupid! What do you think that a lioness becoming very passionate, would make an ordinary jackal her husband? or would a she elephant prefer an ass? or would a heavenly Cow

like a bison? Go to Śumbha and Niśumbha and tell truly to them: "Fight or go instantly to Pātāla."

व्यास उवाच

कालिकाया वचः शुचा स देत्यो धूपजोचना: ।

तापुवाच महाभाग क्रोधसंरक्तलोचना: ॥ ८ ॥

दूर्दैंग ल्चा निर्हलाजी सिंहं च दमवर्गितम् ।

गृहीतैनां गमियामि राजानं प्रत्यहं किल ॥ ९ ॥

रसभंभपथालाकि विषेपि निद्र साम्पतम् ।

नोचेतां निशितैर्वर्णीह्न्यय कलहप्रिये ॥ १ ० ॥

Vyāsa said: O Fortunate One! The Demon Dhimralocana, hearing thus the Kālika's words, became very angry and spoke with reddened eyes: "O Ugly One! I will slay Thee and this lion infatuated with pride in battle and take this Fair One to the king. O Kālī! I have not been able to do this simply it would break our amorous love sentiments. O Quarrelsome One! Otherwise I would have undoubtedly slain Thee just now with my sharpened arrows tipped with irons."

कालिकोवार

किं किवल्यासि मंटान्याजयं धार्यं धनुयात्मा ।

स्वासना युंच वितिष्ठान्तनाति यमवसिति ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing thus, Kālikā said: “O Fool! Why do you boast vainly? this is not the religion of a hero with bows and arrows in their hands, Shoot your arrows with all your might; I will send you to the realm of Death.”

व्यास उवाच

तच्छूला वचनं दैत्वः संगूहा कार्मकं कुदम् ।

कालिकां तां शरासार्वेदवर्गतिलिजातिशितः ॥ १ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the Devi's words, Dhimralocana caught hold of his very strong bow and began to shoot arrows after arrows at Kālīkā.

देवायतु प्रेक्षकास्त्र विमानवरसर्यस्थतः ।

तां स्तुवंते जयेन्युद्वेदीं शक्रपुरोगमाः ॥ 13 ॥

Book V Chapter XXV

Indra and the other Devas came out to see the fight on their best cars in the celestial space and shouted “Victory to the Devi” and thus eulogised Her.

तयोः परस्यं युद्धं प्रवृतं चातिवहागणम् ।

बायाड़बागदाशक्तिमुसलातिद्धिकलटम् ॥ १४ ॥

कालिका बाणपातैसृत हवा पूर्व खतराव ।

वंभज तद्यं व्यूंदं जहास च मुडुमुई: ॥ १५ ॥

Then a deadly fight ensued between them with arrows, axes, clubs, Šaktis, and Mūsalas and various other weapons. Kalikā cut off at the very outset all the asses that carried the chariot by Her arrows and next broke his chariot and began to laugh repeatedly.

न चान्यं रथमाकडः कोपेन प्रज्वलम्रिति ।

बाणवृष्टि चकारागां कालिकोपर भारत ॥ 16 ॥

सारपि चिष्ठदेल तरसा तथ्य बाणानसंगतान् ।

मुगोचान्यगुवेगान्दानोपरि कालिका ॥ 17 ॥

O Bharata! Then Dhūmralocana becoming angry mounted on another chariot and began to shoot deadly arrows at Kālika. Kālika Devi, too, cut off those arrows into pieces before they reached Her and shot arrows after arrows on the Dānava in quick succession.

तैवाँणिन्हितास्तस्य पाणिण्याहः सहचशः ।

बर्षत्र च रर्थ वेगात्युतं हत्वा खरानपि ॥ 18 ॥

चिच्छेद निद्वुः सद्यो बाणैकरासद्रिभे: ।

मूंद चक्र सुराणों सा संखावटा तथाप्रकेतो ॥ 19 ॥

Thousands of his soldiers near to him were killed; the asses and the charioteer were killed and the cariot was broken. She cut off his arrows by Her swift serpent-like arrows and blew Her conchshell.

विद्य: परिधं गृछा सर्वलोहमयं दृछम् ।

आजगाम त्योपस्थ कुपितो धूखलेचनः ॥ 20 ॥

वाचा निर्भसैन्यकाली काललः कालसबिभः ।

अर्शैव त्वां हनिष्यामि कुरूपे पिंगलोचने ॥ 21 ॥

The Devas seeing this became very glad. Dhūmralocana, seeing himself displaced from his chariot, took up with anger his very strong Parigha

weapon and came near to the chariot of the Devi. Then the Dānava, terrific like death, began to abuse the Devi and said: "O Ugly tawny-eyed Kālī! I will kill Thee just now."

इत्युक्त्वा सहसा उपान्य परिवं प्रिषयते यदा ।

हूँद्रपेणैव तं भम्म चकार तरसांविका ॥ 2 2 ॥

Thus saying, he suddenly went near to Her and when he was about to throw his Parigha weapon on Her, the Ambikā Devi burnt him to ashes simply by Her loud shout (of defiance).

दृष्ट्वा भर्मपौहृतं दैत्वं सैनिका भयविक्रताः ।

चकुः पलायनं सढो हा तातैत्यबुवन्यथ ॥ २३ ॥

दैवास्तं निहतं बूद्या दानवं धूपलोचनम् ।

मुपुचुः पुच्यष्टिं ते मुदिता गगाने स्थिताः ॥ 2 4 ॥

Seeing Dhūmralocana burnt to ashes, his soldiers became panic stricken, and fled away immediately, crying aloud “O Father!” “O Father!” The Devas saw this and gladly showered from high heaps of flowers on the Devi.

राथूमितसदा राजन्द्रकाण सम्यघत ।

निरहतैनवरश्रेः खरेक्ष वाणैतशा ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The battle ground then assumed a dreadful appearance; at some places the slain Dānavas; at others, the horses; at other places elephants and at some other place the asses lay scattered on the field.

गृधा: काका वटा: ग्रेशेना वरभा जयुकासता ।

ननुद्धुकुगु: प्रेतान्यतितान् रणभूमिषु ॥ 26 ॥

The herons, crows, vultures, the Piśācas of the class Vatā, Varaphās and jackals and other carnivorous animals, began to dance wildly and clamor hideously at the sight of the dead bodies, lying on the field.

अधिका तरणाश्यानं त्यकवा दूर्यलान्ते ।

गत्वा चकार चायदूगं संश्वानं भयप्रद्ध ॥ 27 ॥

The Ambikā Devi then quitting the field, went to a distant place and blew Her conchshell so furiously and terribly that Śumbha heard that terrific noise, while he was sitting in his own residence.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

तं श्रुता दरगबंदु तु शुभ: सचानि संस्थितः ।

दृष्टावश दानवाभ्यमानानातन्कीरोक्षितान् ॥ 28 ॥

छित्यपादकाश्रांश मझकारोपितानपि ।

भन्पुक्रकटिधीवाक्नन्द्यानाननेकशः ॥ 29 ॥

At the next moment, he saw that the Dānava forces had retreated, and they were coming there crying. Some of them were besmeared with blood all over the bodies; some had got their feet, some their arms, cut asunder, some were devoid of eyes, some had got their backs broken; some had their waists broken; some got their necks broken and some were going on bedsteads.

बीक्ष्य युष्पो निरुर्णेषु कव गतो घुप्तोषतः ।

कर्थे भन्या: समायाता ननीति किं वरानना ॥ 30 ॥

सैन्यं कुत्र गत मन्दा: कथवन्तु यथोचितम् ।

कयायं शुब्नानोडा श्रूयते भयवर्धनः ॥ 31 ॥

Seeing them thus, Sumbha and Niśambha asked them: “Where is Dhūmralocana? Why have you all retreated? And why have you not brought that Lady? Where are the other forces? Who has blown this horrible conchshell? O Fools! Inform me quickly and truly all these things.

गणा ऊचुः

बलं च पातितं सर्व निहतो धूपलोचनः ।

कृतं कालिकया कर्म रणभूमावमानुप्रम् ॥ 32 ॥

गंखवार्डपिंककायासु गगनं व्याय प्राते ।

हर्षद: सुरसंधानां दानवानां च शोककृत् ॥ 33 ॥

The soldiers said: “O King! Dhūmralocana has been slain by Kālikā; She has destroyed all the soldiers and has done extraordinary deeds. O King! Know the blowing of the conchshell that has caused terror in the hearts of the Dānavas and has enhanced the joy of the Devas and is being resounded in the celestial space, is that done by the Ambikā Devi.*

*Note: In the Mārkandeya Purāna, Ambikā killed Dhūmra.

यदा निपातिता: सर्वे तेन केसरणि विषो ।

रथा भवना ह्याधीक्ष बाणपातिर्विनारिताः ॥ 34 ॥

गगानस्या सुराधुकुः पुण्यवृष्टि मुदावित्वः ।

दूर्खा भवने वर्स सर्वे पातितं धूमलोचनम् ॥ 35 ॥

“O Lord! When the Devi broke the chariot of Dhimralocana by the multitude of Her arrows and killed the horses and at last slew Dhimralocana himself, when all the forces were slain by Her who appeared like a lion and when the rest of the army retreated, the Devas seeing all these were very much gladdened and showered flowers from the celestial sky.

निश्यस्तु कृतोउसामिभजीये नैव भवेदिति ।

विवारं कुरु राजेन्द्र मनिशिमर्शवितमेः ॥ 36 ॥

O King! We have come to a perfect conclusion that we will not get the victory; now consult with your expert ministers and do what is needful.

विस्योउं महाराज यदेतका जनद्विकला ।

भवाद्ध: सह युद्धाय संशिता सै-व्यावर्जिता ॥ 37 ॥

O King! The Supreme Goddess of the Universe is waiting there alone to fight with you without any help of any other forces; this is a great wonder to us.

निर्भयैकाकिनी बाला सिंहासुक्रा मटोल्कता ।

चिचमेनतमहाराज भासतेउद्धुमझसा ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Intoxicated with Her power, that Girl, fearless, is reigning there taking Her stand on the lion. All these seem wonderful to us.

सचिवा विश्राटो वारण खर्चा निवर्णमेव च ।

मन्त्रयिता महाराज कुरु कार्य व्यासचि ॥ 39 ॥

O King! Consult with your councillors and out of the four policies peace, fight, retreat or remaining neutral, accept what is best.

तस्त्रिधी बलं नास्ति त्वाधि श्रुतापन ।

पांशिग्राहाः सुराः सर्वे पंधिष्यन्ति किलापति ॥ 40 ॥

O Tormentor of the foes! True! There are no forces with the Devi, but the whole host of the Devas will take up Her cause in crisis, there is no doubt.

समये तस्मीपस्थौ जाती च हरिशुक्टी ।

लोकपाला: समीपेपेड्य वर्जने गनने स्थितः ॥ 41 ॥

In due time, Hari and Hara both will come and assist Her, now the guardians of the several

Book V Chapter XXV

quarters, the Lokapālas are waiting by Her side in the celestial space.

स्वोगणाकु गन्थवीं: किसरा मानुशास्तथा ।

तत्सहायोष् मन्त्वा: समये सुत्तापन ॥ 42 ॥

O Tormentor of the Gods! Know that the Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and human beings all will come timely and help Her. O King! We guess all these.

अस्माकं मितिमानेन झालते सर्ववैधानम् ।

अंबिकाया: सहायाशा तत्कायीशा न काचन ॥ 43 ॥

But that Lady does not want the assistance of anyone nor does She expect that any other body would do the work for Her.

एका नाशयितुं शक्ता जानसर्वं चराचम् ।

का कथा दानवानां तु संवैषधपिति निश्रयः ॥ 44 ॥

इति ज्ञाला महाभागा यथा कचि तथा कुल ।

हितं सर्व मिति वाक्यं कतव्यमनुयाधिभि: ॥ 45 ॥

You must know this certainly, that She alone can destroy this whole Universe. What to speak of the Dānavas only! O Highly Fortunate One! Knowing all these, do as you like. It is the duty of the servants to speak beneficial and at the same time true words with moderation.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं तेषां गुभम: पवलतादनः ।

कनीर्वांसं समानीय पप्रच्छ रहसि सिधतः ॥ 46 ॥

भातः कालिकापडोद निरहतो धूपतोषतः ।

बतं च शगतितं सर्वे गणा भवना: समापततः ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Śumbha, the tormentor of others, hearing their words asked his younger brother in private: "O Brother! This Kālika has slain today Dhūmralocana with his forces; the few retreated and came over to me.

अधिका शंखतादं वै कोतित मन्दार्थित ।

जानितं चैव दुर्जीया गति: कालस्य सर्वेधि ॥ 48 ॥

दूर्णं वज्ञायते दूर्तं वज्जं चैव तृणायते ।

बलवान् बलहीन: स्याहैवस्य गतिरीयुगी ॥ 49 ॥

Now the Ambikā Devī, puffed up with pride is blowing Her conchshell. Brother! The ways of Time are knowable even to the wise. The grass

becomes a thunderbolt and the thunderbolt becomes like a grass and powerless.

पृष्ठधीय तां महाभाग किं कतन्यमतः परम् ।

अभोग्या चाधिक्वा नूनं कारणादत्र चागता ॥ 50 ॥

युक्ते पलायनं वीर युद्धे वा वद सल्वम् ।

लघुं ज्येष्ठे चित्रज्ञापिति त्वामई कार्यसंकटे ॥ 51 ॥

Know thus the course of Destiny. O Fortunate One! Now I ask you, what are we to do now? Are we to entertain yet the desire of enjoying Ambikā, or are we to fly away from here or are we to fight on? Say quickly. Though younger, in times of difficulty, I consider you as my elder.

निरुभ्य उवाच

न वा पलायनं युक्त न वुर्ग्रिद्धगं तथा ।

युद्धमेव परं श्रेय: सर्वेश्वरायताउनच ॥ 52 ॥

Hearing thus the Sumbha's words, Niśumbha said: "O Sinless One! Flight or taking refuge in a fort is not reasonable.

सरी-योर्ड गयिष्यायि रणे तु प्रवराशितः ।

हत्वा तामागयिष्यायि तसा त्ववलायीयम् ॥ 53 ॥

To fight with this Lady is the best course. I will take the best generals and soldiers with me and will slay that Lady and quickly return.

अथवा बलवदैवाद्यथा चेढ़ाविध्यति ।

मृते माय त्वया कार्य विमुग्य च पुनः पुनः ॥ 54 ॥

And if Fate be strong and prove it otherwise, then, after my death, think out again and again and do what is best."

इति तस्य वधः शूला शुभः प्रोवा चानुजम् ।

तिह तं चचडमुपडी द्वी गच्छेतां बलसंयुतो ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing thus the younger brother's words, Śumbha said "You better wait; let Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa go to the battle, surrounded with forces."

शशक्रामृद्धायात्र न सुक्तं गतयोचनम् ।

चण्डपुरुषी महावीरी तां हनुं सर्वेथा क्षमो ॥ ५६ ॥

To kill a hare it is not necessary to send an elephant. This is a very trifling matter; the two great warriors Candā and Mundā will be freely able to slay Her.

शूलुक्ला प्रातरं शुभ्यः सम्भाय च महावली ।

उवाच चचनं राजा चणदुम्ृद्धी पुरःस्थिति ॥ 57 ॥

गच्छतं चण्डपुण्डी हौ स्वसैन्यपरिवारिति ।

हन्तु तामवलों शीधि निर्लेक्जां मदार्थवितान् ॥ 58 ॥

Thus saying his younger brother, the King Śumbha addressed Caṇḍa Muṇḍa, who were waiting before him, thus: O Canda! O Muṇḍa! Take your forces and go quickly to kill that shameless Lady, puffed up with pride.

गृहीत्वाद निहत्याजी कालिकां पिंगलोचनाम् ।

आगम्यतां महापारी कृत्वा कार्य महत्ततम् ॥ 59 ||

O Pair of warriors! Kill that tawny-eyed Kālika in the battle and bring that Arnbikā Devi here quickly.

सा नायाति गृहीताउपि गर्हिता चाधिक्या यदि ।

तदा बाणीम्हातीक्षेणीर्नल्याउउद्वमपिछ्ठा ॥ 60 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे पत्रमकर्ये

पडविंशोउद्यानः ॥ 61 ॥

Do this Great Service. And if that haughty Ambikā be unwilling to come here, though taken as a captive, then kill that Durgā, the ornament of the battle, too, by sharp arrows.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of Dhūmralocana in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

