CHAPTER XIV

On the Daity's Getting Back their Sukrācārya

व्यास उवाच

इति सिंह्येल मनसा तानुवाच हस्रिवः ।

विश्रिता मत्सक्षरेण दैत्याः किं गुरुणा किल ।। । ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus arguing in his mind, Śukrācārya smilingly said to the Daityas: O Daityas! what for have you all been cheated by Brhaṣpati, the Guru of the Devas, in my guise.

अर्ह काव्यो गुरुकाशं देकाकार्यप्रासधकः ।

अनेन बक्षिता यूर्यं महाज्ञा नात संशयः ॥ २ ॥

I am Śukrācārya; you are my disciples; this man is Brhaṣpati, wanting to serve the Gods. He has cheated you, there is no doubt in this.

भा ब्रद्धयं चोरोस्पायां द्राधिकोरयं महाकृति: ।

अनुपाख्त मां याज्ञास्त्वर्जनैं बृह्मश्यति ॥ ३ ॥

This vain villainous person has assumed my form; do not put the least faith in his words. O Daityas! You are disciples, follow unto me; leave this Brhaşpati, vain and arrogant.

दूर्याकष्टं चबरतस्य दूर्या ती सूर्शी पुनः ।

विस्यमं परंं जगुः काव्योउयिति निश्रिताः ॥ 4 ॥

The Daityas, on hearing his words were struck with wonder at the resemblance of the two personages and came to the conclusion that “the person just come is the real Śukrācārya.

स तान्त्रीय सुसंधानानुक्राविस्युवाच ह ।

गुर्वाँं चंचचायेव मदूधोरं बृह्यस्ति: ॥ 5 ॥

Then Brhaşpati, the false Śukrācārya explained to the Daityas in plain and enchanting words that “the second man just come is the Deva Guru Brhaşpati; he has come here in my guise. His object is to cheat you.

प्राणो वश्यितुं युधान्देवकार्यार्थसिद्धये ।

मा विश्वासं वचस्यय कुठघं दैत्यसत्तमाः ॥ 6 ॥

He has come here to cheat you and serve the purpose of the Devas; do not believe in his words.

प्राणता विश्वा मया शफभोर्याभनधायपाति ताम् ।

देवेथ्यो विजयं नूनं कारिष्यामि न संशयः ॥ 7 ॥

What knowledge I have acquired from the God Śarībhū, I am teaching it to you; I will make you, no doubt, victorious in the battle with the Devas."

इति श्रुत्वा गुरोविंयं काव्यरूपधरस्य ते ।

विश्वांस परमं जगुः काव्योर्यमिति निश्यान् ॥ 8 ॥

Thus the Daityas, hearing the words of the false Śuśārkārya, thought the false one to be real and placed implicit reliance in his words.

काव्येन बहुधा तत्र बोधिताः कित दानवाः ।

बुबुधूनं गुगोर्मायामीहिताः कालपयंयात् ॥ 9 ॥

The real Śukrākārya, then explained them as much as he could; but the Daityas, owing to the magic of the false Śukrārya and to the wonderful effect of time, did not hear his words.

एवं ते निश्छयं कृत्ता ततो भागवमब्रुन्त् ।

अयं गुरुर्नों धर्मातना बुद्धिद्ध हिते तः ॥ 10 ॥

The Daityas thus convinced said to the real Śukrāśraya, “this man before us is our Guru for our welfare enlightenment, he is the foremost religious Śukrāśraya; for ten continuously he is giving us advices. You are not our Guru; you appear fictitious and false; you better leave this place and go away.”

दूण बर्षीण सततमयं नः शारित भागवः ।

गच्छ तर्व कृहको भासि नास्याके गुरुपन्तु ॥ 11 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The Dull brained Daityas repeatedly told Šukrācārya the reproachful words and bowed down to the false Šukrācārya, and, saluting him, gladly welcomed him as their Guru.

इतुसुक्ता भार्ची मुहा निर्भर्य व पुनः पुनः ।

जगुहुस्तं गृहं प्रीत्या प्रगिपत्याचीभवाहा च ॥ १ २ ॥

काव्यस्तु तनयान्दूर्वा चुकोषाय शरणाय च ।

दैत्याविचोधिताभ्यमा गुरुणा चातिविहितान् ॥ १ ३ ॥

यस्मान्यया बोधिता वे गृह्वीयुर्नं च मे वशः ।

तस्मान्नरस्थेना वै परणभवमावस्यय ॥ १ ४ ॥

The real Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas exceedingly attached to Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, and deceived by his words, cursed them out of anger and said: "As you have not taken my words though I have explained every thing to you, you would lose your knowledge and get defeat.

मद्ववापकर्ते कामं स्वल्ये काले ह्वायाययः ।

तदास्य कपटं सर्वे परित्रां भविष्यति ॥ 15 ॥

As you have shown towards me, you will get the fruits of it at an early date and will then understand the deceitful behaviors of that Deva Guru.

इत्युक्तवासी जगाभागु भागवेः कोधेसंयुतः ।

ब्रह्म्यातिपूर्वे प्राप्य तस्थो तत्र समाहितः ॥ 16 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying Śukrācārya hurriedly went away, in furiated with anger. Bhraspati was glad and remained there with his mind calm.

ततः शप्तानुर्जाला दैत्यांस्ताम्पारीयण है ।

जगमा तरसा तव्कता स्वस्तयं स्व विधाय च ॥ 17 ॥

गत्वोबाच तदा शकं कृतं कार्य मधुवम् ।

शप्ता: गुहैमा ते द्विता मया तवक्ता: पुनः किल ॥ 18 ॥

निराधारा: कृता नृनं वातधं सुरससभा: ।

संग्रामाय महाभाग शापद्धया मया कृताः ॥ 19 ॥

Bhraspati then knowing the Daityas cursed by Śukrācārya, assumed his real appearance, left that place, and hurriedly returned to Indra. He began to say “I have undoubtedly succeeded in my undertaking; the Daityas have been cursed and left by me too. They are now helpless; so, O Good Suras! I have made them cursed, you would better now try to fight with them.”

इति श्रुत्वा गुरोर्वस्यं मघवा मुदामपल्न् ।

जड्धूश सुरा: सर्वे प्रतिपुज्य बृह्मयतिम् ॥ 20 ॥

संग्रामाय मिति चक्रः संविद्वार्य विष्य: पुनः ।

निर्वंगुर्मिततः सर्वे दानवाभिमयुका: सुरा: ॥ 21 ॥

Indra heard their Guru and became very glad; all the other Devas were glad and worshipped him. They held another cabinet, secret council, how to fight with the Daityas; and, then, all uniting together marched out in battle against the Asuras.

सुरान्समुहाताज्ञाला कृतोद्योगान्यहावलान् ।

अन्तहिंतं गुरुं चैव बथयुधिंहतयान्वितः ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing that the powerful Devas marching towards them ready to fight and knowing their false Guru had fled, the Daityas became very anxious.

परस्पमधोचुले मोहितातस्य मायया ।

सम्पसाठो महात्मा च यातोउसी नष्टमानस: ॥ 23 ॥

They told each other: Alas! We were enchanted by the Devaguru; the highscould Śukrācārya angrily left us; now it is our incumbent duty to satisfy him.

वड्यायिता गत पापो गुरुः कपटपिण्डतः ।

भ्रातृस्कीतंभनः प्रायो मलिनोउन्तबिकेः सुचि: ॥ 24 ॥

That vicious, dirty inside and pure outside, hypocrite Pundit Deva Guru, who used to go to his brother's wife, has really cheated and has quitted us.

किं कुंना: क्व च गच्छाम: कर्थ काव्यं प्रक्रोधितम् ।

कुर्विमहि सुहायांष प्रसनं इद्यानसम् ॥ 25 ॥

What are we to do now? where to go? How to satiate now the anger of Śukra so that he might be glad and help us.

इति संचित्त ने सर्वे मितिता भयंकंपिताः ।

प्रहारं पुतः कृत्वा जगमुते भारपं पुः ॥ 26 ॥

Thus pondering over they all unitedly, shuddering with fear, again went to Śukrācārya, keeping Prahlāda in front of them.

प्राणेशुधगृते तस्य मुनिर्मान्यतता ।

भार्यवत्नावाचा रोषसंरक्तलोचनः ॥ 27 ॥

They all bowed down at the feet of their Guru;

Book IV Chapter XIV

Šukra remained silent; then, bursting with anger and with eyes red, told them.

मया प्रबोधिता चूयं मोहिता गुरुभायया ।

न गृहीत चंचो योग्यं तदा याज्या हिते शृणि ॥ 28 ॥

You were all warned by me that you were being cheated by the Māyā of Brhaṣpati; you did not take my word, as worth hearing, though unselfish, pure and leading to your welfare.

तदास्वागीतश्रहं भवद्धिस्तद्वर्श गतेः ।

प्राणं नूनं मदोभनैमावमानजं फलम् ॥ 29 ॥

Rather you were influenced by him and infatuated with vanity, you insulted me; now you will have to bear undoubtedly the effects of that Karma.

तत्र गच्छत सद्भूषा घजासी कपटाकृति: ।

वंक्कः सुराकार्याँनी नाहं तद्विद्ध बझकः ॥ ३० ॥

You are now vitiated from the path of your welfare; go now where that disguised cheat resides for the welfare of the Gods; know me not to be a cheat like him.

व्यास उवाच

एवं बुवंत शुक्र तु वाक्यसन्दिशया गिरा ।

प्रहादस्ते तदोवाच गृहीता चरणों ततः ॥ ३ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! When Šukra finished saying his uncertain words, Prahlāda clasped his feet and began to say thus:

प्रहाद उवाच

भार्यावछ सयायात्याज्यानस्मांतश्वातृन्त ।

त्यन्तु नारीस सर्वेत्र त्विद्धितांसनयार्थ नः ॥ ३२ ॥

Prahlāda said: O our Guru Bhārgava! To-day we have come to you in a very distressed condition! O Omniscient! we are your disciples; we are your good sons; you ought not to quit us.

गते त्वयि तु मन्थर्ष शैतृपेण दुरात्मना ।

त्वेक्षेयम्युरातार्वियं तेन प्रविश्रतः ॥ 33 ॥

On your departure to get the Mantra, that hypocrite, vicious Brhaspati getting the opportunity, assumed your false appearance and cheated us.

अज्ञानकृतदोषेण नैवं कुयिति शान्तिमान् ।

सर्वेत्रसर्वे विज्ञानासि चितं नः प्रवर्ण त्वति ॥ 34 ॥

Peaceful persons do not take any offence committed with ignorance; you know every thing; you know very well that our hearts are devoted to thee and to thee alone. There is no need of telling any thing further to you.

ज्ञाला नतस्पास भावं त्वज कोर्भ महामते ।

ब्रुवर्ति सुनयः सर्वे शणकोया हि साधयः ॥ 35 ॥

O Highly Intelligent One! By your Tapas, you know our inner minds and relinquish your anger. The sages say that the anger of the saints is not lasting.

जर्त स्वभावतः शीर्ते नह्वातापसमागान्ति ।

भवल्युर्ण विश्योगाच्छ शीतत्यमनुगच्छिति ॥ 36 ॥

O Muni! Water is naturally cool; when in contact with fire it gets, hot; but, when the heat is removed, it gets cold shortly after.

कोधश्रशतलयो वै तचक्यः सर्वेधा बुधैः ।

तस्माइत्रोषं परित्यज्य प्रसादं कुक सूत्रत ॥ 37 ॥

O observer of good vows! Anger is like Cāndāla; sages therefore quit it. Our prayer to you is that you leave your anger and be pleased with us.

यदि न त्वासि कोधे त्वनयस्मानुसु: विज्ञान् ।

तथा तत्का महाभाग गायिष्यायो सत्ताल्म ॥ 38 ॥

If you do not quit your anger and if you make us overpowered with grief and sorrow, O blessed one! We, being abandoned by you, will go down to the Pātāla.

व्यास उवाच

प्रहादस्य वचः श्रुत्वा भाग्यो ज्ञानवशूषा ।

विलोक्य सुमना भूत्वा तानुवाच हसविश्च ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: Bhārgava heard Prahlāda's words and, with his intuitioned eye, came to see the proper state of affairs and was pleased and lovingly said.

न भेतल्यं न गतल्यं दानवा वा सतालम् ।

स्वशिव्यामि वो याज्ञान्यान्यैरितयिः किन्त ॥ 40 ॥ 10

You will not have to fear nor to center into the Pātāla. You are my Yajamānas; I will certainly protect you all by my never failing Mantra power.

हितं सत्यं ब्रवीम्यद्य शृषुण्यं तत् निश्रयम् ।

वचनं मम धर्मज्ञ: श्रुतं यद्बहण: पुरा ॥ 4 1 ॥

O knower of religion! What Brahmā of yore told me, I am now telling you accordingly. Hear my truthful words, leading to your welfare.

अवर्धभ्याविनो भावाः प्रभविति शुभाणुभाः ।

दैवं न चान्यथा कर्तुं क्षमः को3पि धगतते ॥ 4 2 ॥

Whatever is inevitable, doomed to pass, must come to pass, be it auspicious or inauspicious. No one is able in this world to go against the current of Fate.

अष्ट मन्दवला यूयं कालयोगादसंशयम् ।

देवैर्जिताः सकृष्चापि पातालं प्रतिपल्यथा ॥ 4 3 ॥

Under the influence of Time you are now deprived of strength; therefore you will have to suffer defeat at the hands of the Devas and you will have to go once to the Pātāla.

प्राप्त: पर्यविकालो व इति ब्रह्मा उध्यभाषत ।

भुर्फ तारयं भवाद्रिष्ठ पूर्ण सर्वे समुद्धिमत् ॥ 4 4 ॥

युगानि दर्श पूर्णानि देवानात्रक्य मूर्धनि ।

देवयोगाच्छ युधाविभर्षुर्भे जैतलेवमूर्जितम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Brahmā said: When your time to enjoy the sovereignty of the Triloki had come, you enjoyed the kingdoms of the Triloki with all its wealth and power. You attacked the Devas and, helped by Time, had been able to trample them under your feet and held your sovereignty for full ten yugas and enjoyed the pleasures without any hitch.

सावर्गिके मनी राज्य पुनस्तुभ विध्यति ।

पौरब्रहीलोक्यविराजी राज्य प्राप्यति ते बलि: ॥ 46 ॥

You will regain this kingdom in the Sāvarnika manvantara. Then Bali will come in your family as the grandson of Prahlāda and will conquer the Triokī and will get name and fame throughout his kingdom.

यदा वामनस्लेण हृतं देवेन विज्याना ।

तदैव च भव्यतीयः प्रोक्तो देवेन विज्याना ॥ 47 ॥

हृतं वेन बलै राज्यं देवेनावळशधीसद्धये ।

त्वमित्यो भविता चाठ्ये चिषते साविणीके मन्ती ॥ 48 ॥

When the Lord of Vaikuntaha had incarnated as

Vāmana and stolen away the kingdom of Bali, then the Janārdana Viṣṇu told Bali, the king of the Demons that “I have taken away your kingdom by pretext to serve the purpose of the Gods; you will become Indra, no doubt, in the coming Śavarnika manvantara”.

भार्गव उवाच

इल्युक्तो हरिणा पीजस्वल प्रब्रहा संग्रतम् ।

अदृष्यः सर्वभूतानां गुप्तभूतरित भीतवत् ॥ 49 ॥

Bhārgava said: According to the sayings of Śrī Bhagavān Hari, your grandson Bali is now invisible to all creatures and is now passing away his time, very much terror stricken.

एकता वासवेनासी विलिर्यंभरूपाफक ।

गूच्य गृहे स्थितः कामं भयभीतः शतकातः ॥ 50 ॥

दृष्टि बढुप्रा तेन वासवेन बलिस्तव ।

किमर्थ गार्वैं रूपं कृतत्वान्द्विपृगव ॥ 51 ॥

Being afraid of Indra, he is now staying in a lonely house as an ass. One day Indra on seeing him enquired of him, in various ways, the cause of his assuming that ass-body.

भोक्ता लं सर्वतेकास्य दैत्यानां च प्रगामिता ।

“न लज्जा खरूसंपण तव राक्षसस्ताम ।”

तस्य तद्धचनं श्रुत्वा दैत्याज्ञो बलिस्तदा ॥ 52 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas? You have always enjoyed pleasures of all the world; you are the ruler of the Daityas; you ruled over all the world; do you not feel shame now in thus assuming this ass body. The Lord of the Daityas, hearing him, spoke thus.

प्रोवाच चवनं शकं कोउर शोकः शतकतो ।

यथा विज्यामृदोतजो मल्यकछ्छपतं गते ॥ 53 ॥

तथा3ई खरूर्णे संवितः कालयोगतः ।

यथा तं कमले लीन: संस्थितो बहाहत्यया ॥ 54 ॥

O Indra—‘There is nothing to be sorry in these matters? When the most powerful Viṣṇu can assume fish and tortoise incarnations, then what wonder is there that I by virtue of the force of Time, am now staying as an ass? When you had murdered a Brāhmana, you had hoid yourself

Book IV Chapter XV

in the Mānasa lake in the lotusses; similarly to-day distressed, I am staying here in this ass body.

पीडितश तथा ताश स्थितोई खललपूक् ।

दैवार्थिनस्य किं दुःखं किं सुरं चाकशासन ॥ 55 ॥

कालः क्रातिवे वे नूनं यदिच्छति यथा तथा ।

O Indra! What sorrow or happiness can be to a person who is under the control of Fate. To him everything is alike; for whatever the Time wishes, It can act accordingly."

भानव उवाच

इति ते बलिवेदेशेगे कृत्वा संविद्युतमाम् ॥ ५६ ॥

प्रबोधी प्राप्तुः कामं यथास्थानं च जमतुः ।

Bhārgava said to Prahlāda! Both persons Bali and Indra got enlightenment at the mutual

conversations; and they went away to their places at their own will.

इन्योतनें समाध्याता मया देवबलिष्ठता ।

देवाधीनं जगत्सर्वे सदेवासुरमानुभम् ॥ 57 ॥

श्रिति श्रीमद्दैयिणालो महापुराणे वतुर्बेकन्के

चतुर्देशोउध्याः: 11 14 11

O Lord of the Asuras! I have narrated to you this stroy indicating how powerful is the Time. Know that the Devas and Daityas and all the human beings and this whole universe is under that Great Fate.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses on the Daityas getting back their Śukrācārya, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XV

