[Ch 14 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus arguing in his mind, Śukrācārya smilingly said to the Daityas: O Daityas! what for have you all been cheated by Brhaṣpati, the Guru of the Devas, in my guise.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus arguing in his mind, Śukrācārya smilingly said to the Daityas :-- O Daityas! what for have you all been cheated by Bṛhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, in my guise.

[Ch 14 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am Śukrācārya; you are my disciples; this man is Brhaṣpati, wanting to serve the Gods. He has cheated you, there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am Śukrācārya; you are my disciples; this man is Bṛhaspati, wanting to serve the Gods. He has cheated you, there is no doubt in this.

[Ch 14 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This vain villainous person has assumed my form; do not put the least faith in his words. O Daityas! You are disciples, follow unto me; leave this Brhaşpati, vain and arrogant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This vain villainous person has assumed my form; do not put the least faith in his words. O Daityas! You are my disciples, follow unto me; leave this Bṛhaspati, vain and arrogant.

[Ch 14 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas, on hearing his words were struck with wonder at the resemblance of the two personages and came to the conclusion that “the person just come is the real Śukrācārya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas, on hearing his words were struck with wonder at the resemblance of the two personages and came to the conclusion that “the person just come is the real Śukrācārya.”

[Ch 14 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Brhaşpati, the false Śukrācārya explained to the Daityas in plain and enchanting words that “the second man just come is the Deva Guru Brhaşpati; he has come here in my guise. His object is to cheat you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Bṛhaspati, the false Śukrācārya explained to the Daityas in plain and enchanting words that “the second man just come is the Deva Guru Bṛhaspati; he has come here in my guise. His object is to cheat you.

[Ch 14 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He has come here to cheat you and serve the purpose of the Devas; do not believe in his words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He has come here to cheat you and serve the purpose of the Devas; do not believe in his words.

[Ch 14 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What knowledge I have acquired from the God Śarībhū, I am teaching it to you; I will make you, no doubt, victorious in the battle with the Devas."
NEW CORR ENG ──► What knowledge I have acquired from the God Śāmbhu, I am teaching it to you; I will make you, no doubt, victorious in the battle with the Devas.”

[Ch 14 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the Daityas, hearing the words of the false Śuśārkārya, thought the false one to be real and placed implicit reliance in his words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the Daityas, hearing the words of the false Śukrācārya, thought the false one to be real and placed implicit reliance in his words.

[Ch 14 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The real Śukrākārya, then explained them as much as he could; but the Daityas, owing to the magic of the false Śukrārya and to the wonderful effect of time, did not hear his words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The real Śukrācārya, then explained them as much as he could; but the Daityas, owing to the magic of the false Śukrācārya and to the wonderful effect of time, did not hear his words.

[Ch 14 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Daityas thus convinced said to the real Śukrāśraya, “this man before us is our Guru for our welfare enlightenment, he is the foremost religious Śukrāśraya; for ten continuously he is giving us advices. You are not our Guru; you appear fictitious and false; you better leave this place and go away.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Daityas thus convinced said to the real Śukrācārya, “this man before us is our Guru for our welfare and enlightenment, he is the foremost religious Śukrācārya; for ten years continuously he is giving us advices. You are not our Guru; you appear fictitious and false; you better leave this place and go away.”

[Ch 14 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dull brained Daityas repeatedly told Šukrācārya the reproachful words and bowed down to the false Šukrācārya, and, saluting him, gladly welcomed him as their Guru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The dull brained Daityas repeatedly told to Śukrācārya the reproachful words and bowed down to the false Śukrācārya, and, saluting, him, gladly welcomed him as their Guru.

[Ch 14 Verse 12-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The real Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas exceedingly attached to Brhaşpati, the Guru of the Devas, and deceived by his words, cursed them out of anger and said: "As you have not taken my words though I have explained every thing to you, you would lose your knowledge and get defeat.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The real Śukrācārya, seeing the Daityas exceedingly attached to Bṛhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, and deceived by his words, cursed them out of anger and said :--“As you have not taken my words though I have explained everything to you, you would lose your knowledge and get defeat.

[Ch 14 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As you have shown towards me, you will get the fruits of it at an early date and will then understand the deceitful behaviors of that Deva Guru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As you have shown disrespect towards me, you will get the fruits of it at an early date and will then understand the deceitful behaviours of that Deva Guru.”

[Ch 14 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus saying Śukrācārya hurriedly went away, in furiated with anger. Bhraspati was glad and remained there with his mind calm.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying Śukrācārya hurriedly went away, infuriated with anger. Bṛhaspati was glad and remained there with his mind calm.

[Ch 14 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhraspati then knowing the Daityas cursed by Śukrācārya, assumed his real appearance, left that place, and hurriedly returned to Indra. He began to say “I have undoubtedly succeeded in my undertaking; the Daityas have been cursed and left by me too. They are now helpless; so, O Good Suras! I have made them cursed, you would better now try to fight with them.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bṛhaspati then knowing the Daityas cursed by Śukrācārya, assumed his real appearance, left that place, and hurriedly returned to Indra. He began to say “I have undoubtedly succeeded in my undertaking; the Daityas have been cursed and left by me too. They are now helpless; so, O Good Suras! I have made them cursed, you would better now try to fight with them.”

[Ch 14 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra heard their Guru and became very glad; all the other Devas were glad and worshipped him. They held another cabinet, secret council, how to fight with the Daityas; and, then, all uniting together marched out in battle against the Asuras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra heard their Guru and became very glad; all the other Devas were glad and worshipped him. They held another cabinet, secret council, how to fight with the Daityas; and, then, all uniting together marched out in battle against the Asuras.

[Ch 14 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing that the powerful Devas marching towards them ready to fight and knowing their false Guru had fled, the Daityas became very anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing that the powerful Devas are marching towards them ready to fight and knowing their false Guru had fled, the Daityas became very anxious.

[Ch 14 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They told each other: Alas! We were enchanted by the Devaguru; the highscould Śukrācārya angrily left us; now it is our incumbent duty to satisfy him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They told each other :-- Alas! We were enchanted by the Devaguru; the highsouled Śukrācārya angrily left us; now it is our iñcumbent duty to satisfy him.

[Ch 14 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That vicious, dirty inside and pure outside, hypocrite Pundit Deva Guru, who used to go to his brother's wife, has really cheated and has quitted us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That vicious, dirty inside and pure outside, hypocrite Pundit Deva Guru, who used to go to his brother’s wife, has really cheated and has quitted us.

[Ch 14 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What are we to do now? where to go? How to satiate now the anger of Śukra so that he might be glad and help us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What are we to do now? where to go? How to satiate now the anger of Śukrā so that he might be glad and help us.

[Ch 14 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus pondering over they all unitedly, shuddering with fear, again went to Śukrācārya, keeping Prahlāda in front of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus pondering over they all unitedly, shuddering with fear, again went to Śukrācārya, keeping Prahlāda in front of them.

[Ch 14 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They all bowed down at the feet of their Guru; Šukra remained silent; then, bursting with anger and with eyes red, told them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They all bowed down at the feet of their Guru; Śukrā remained silent; then, bursting with anger and with eyes red, told them.

[Ch 14 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You were all warned by me that you were being cheated by the Māyā of Brhaṣpati; you did not take my word, as worth hearing, though unselfish, pure and leading to your welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You were all warned by me that you were being cheated by the Māyā of Bṛhaspati; you did not take my word, as worth hearing, though unselfish, pure and leading to your welfare.

[Ch 14 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rather you were influenced by him and infatuated with vanity, you insulted me; now you will have to bear undoubtedly the effects of that Karma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather you were influenced by him and infatuated with vanity, you insulted me; now you will have to bear undoubtedly the effects of that Karma.

[Ch 14 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You are now vitiated from the path of your welfare; go now where that disguised cheat resides for the welfare of the Gods; know me not to be a cheat like him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are now vitiated from the path of your welfare; go now where that disguised cheat resides for the welfare of the Gods; know me not to be a cheat like him.

[Ch 14 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! When Šukra finished saying his uncertain words, Prahlāda clasped his feet and began to say thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! When Śukrā finished saying his uncertain words, Prahlāda clasped his feet and began to say thus :--

[Ch 14 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahlāda said: O our Guru Bhārgava! To-day we have come to you in a very distressed condition! O Omniscient! we are your disciples; we are your good sons; you ought not to quit us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda said :-- O our Guru Bhārgava! Today we have come to you in a very distressed condition! O Omniscient! we are your disciples; we are your good sons; you ought not to quit us.

[Ch 14 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On your departure to get the Mantra, that hypocrite, vicious Brhaspati getting the opportunity, assumed your false appearance and cheated us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On your departure to get the Mantra, that hypocrite, vicious Bṛhaspati getting the opportunity, assumed your false appearance and cheated us.

[Ch 14 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Peaceful persons do not take any offence committed with ignorance; you know every thing; you know very well that our hearts are devoted to thee and to thee alone. There is no need of telling any thing further to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Peaceful persons do not take any offence committed with ignorance; you know everything; you know very well that our hearts are devoted to thee and to thee alone. There is no need of telling anything further to you.

[Ch 14 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Highly Intelligent One! By your Tapas, you know our inner minds and relinquish your anger. The sages say that the anger of the saints is not lasting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Highly Intelligent One! By your Tapas, you know our inner minds and relinquish your anger. The sages say that the anger of the saints is not lasting.

[Ch 14 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Water is naturally cool; when in contact with fire it gets, hot; but, when the heat is removed, it gets cold shortly after.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Water is naturally cool; when in contact with fire it gets hot; but, when the heat is removed, it gets cold shortly after.

[Ch 14 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O observer of good vows! Anger is like Cāndāla; sages therefore quit it. Our prayer to you is that you leave your anger and be pleased with us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O observer of good vows! Anger is like candāla; sages therefore quit it. Our prayer to you is that you leave your anger and be pleased with us.

[Ch 14 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If you do not quit your anger and if you make us overpowered with grief and sorrow, O blessed one! We, being abandoned by you, will go down to the Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If you do not quit your anger and if you make us overpowered with grief and sorrow, O blessed one! We, being abandoned by you, will go down to the Pātāla.

[Ch 14 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Bhārgava heard Prahlāda's words and, with his intuitioned eye, came to see the proper state of affairs and was pleased and lovingly said.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Bhārgava heard Prahlāda’s words and, with his intuitioned eye, came to see the proper state of affairs and was pleased and lovingly said.

[Ch 14 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will not have to fear nor to center into the Pātāla. You are my Yajamānas; I will certainly protect you all by my never failing Mantra power.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will not have to fear nor to enter into the Pātāla. You are my Yajamānas; I will certainly protect you all by my never failing Mantra power.

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O knower of religion! What Brahmā of yore told me, I am now telling you accordingly. Hear my truthful words, leading to your welfare.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O knower of religion! What Brahmā of yore told me, I am now telling you accordingly. Hear my truthful words, leading to your welfare.

[Ch 14 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever is inevitable, doomed to pass, must come to pass, be it auspicious or inauspicious. No one is able in this world to go against the current of Fate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever is inevitable, doomed to pass, must come to pass, be it auspicious or inauspicious. No one is able in this world to go against the current of Fate.

[Ch 14 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Under the influence of Time you are now deprived of strength; therefore you will have to suffer defeat at the hands of the Devas and you will have to go once to the Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Under the influence of Time you are now deprived of strength, therefore you will have to suffer defeat at the hands of the Devas and you will have to go once to the Pātāla.

[Ch 14 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: When your time to enjoy the sovereignty of the Triloki had come, you enjoyed the kingdoms of the Triloki with all its wealth and power. You attacked the Devas and, helped by Time, had been able to trample them under your feet and held your sovereignty for full ten yugas and enjoyed the pleasures without any hitch.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- When your time to enjoy the sovereignty of the Trilokī had come, you enjoyed the kingdoms of the Trilokī with all its wealth and power. You attacked the Devas and, helped by Time, had been able to trample them under your feet and held your sovereignty for full ten yugas and enjoyed the pleasures without any hitch.

[Ch 14 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You will regain this kingdom in the Sāvarnika manvantara. Then Bali will come in your family as the grandson of Prahlāda and will conquer the Triokī and will get name and fame throughout his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You will regain this kingdom in the Sāvarṇik manvantara. Then Bali will come in your family as the grandson of Prahlāda and will conquer the Trilokī and will get name and fame throughout his kingdom.

[Ch 14 Verse 47-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the Lord of Vaikuntaha had incarnated as Vāmana and stolen away the kingdom of Bali, then the Janārdana Viṣṇu told Bali, the king of the Demons that “I have taken away your kingdom by pretext to serve the purpose of the Gods; you will become Indra, no doubt, in the coming Śavarnika manvantara”.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the Lord of Vaikunṭha had incarnated as Vāmana and stolen away the kingdom of Vali, then the Janārdan Viṣṇu told Bali, the king of the Demons that “I have taken away your kingdom by pretext to serve the purpose of the Gods; you will become Indra, no doubt, in the coming Sāvarṇika manvantara.”

[Ch 14 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhārgava said: According to the sayings of Śrī Bhagavān Hari, your grandson Bali is now invisible to all creatures and is now passing away his time, very much terror stricken.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhārgava said :-- According to the sayings of Śrī Bhagavān Hari, your grandson Bali is now invisible to all creatures and is now passing away his time, very much terror stricken.

[Ch 14 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Being afraid of Indra, he is now staying in a lonely house as an ass. One day Indra on seeing him enquired of him, in various ways, the cause of his assuming that ass-body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Being afraid of Indra, he is now staying in a lonely house as an ass. One day Indra on seeing him enquired of him, in various ways, the cause of his assuming that ass-body.

[Ch 14 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas? You have always enjoyed pleasures of all the world; you are the ruler of the Daityas; you ruled over all the world; do you not feel shame now in thus assuming this ass body. The Lord of the Daityas, hearing him, spoke thus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas! You have always enjoyed pleasures of all the world; you are the ruler of the Daityas; you ruled over all the worlds; do you not feel shame now in thus assuming this ass body. The Lord of the Daityas, hearing him, spoke thus.

[Ch 14 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra—‘There is nothing to be sorry in these matters? When the most powerful Viṣṇu can assume fish and tortoise incarnations, then what wonder is there that I by virtue of the force of Time, am now staying as an ass? When you had murdered a Brāhmana, you had hoid yourself in the Mānasa lake in the lotusses; similarly to-day distressed, I am staying here in this ass body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra, there is nothing to be sorry in these matters. When the most powerful Viṣṇu can assume fish and tortoise incarnations, then what wonder is there that I by virtue of the force of Time, am now staying as an ass? When you had murdered a Brāhmaṇ, you, too had hid yourself in the Mānasa lake in the lotuses; similarly today distressed, I am staying here in this ass body.

[Ch 14 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Indra! What sorrow or happiness can be to a person who is under the control of Fate. To him everything is alike; for whatever the Time wishes, It can act accordingly."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Indra! What sorrow or happiness can be to a person who is under the control of Fate. To him everything is alike; for whatever the Time wishes, It can act accordingly.

[Ch 14 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhārgava said to Prahlāda! Both persons Bali and Indra got enlightenment at the mutual conversations; and they went away to their places at their own will.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhārgava said to Prahlāda! Both persons Bali and Indra got enlightenment at the mutual conversations; and they went away to their places at their own will.

[Ch 14 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Asuras! I have narrated to you this stroy indicating how powerful is the Time. Know that the Devas and Daityas and all the human beings and this whole universe is under that Great Fate. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimadevībhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses on the Daityas getting back their Śukrācārya, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Asuras! I have narrated to you this story indicating how powerful is the Time. Know that the Devas and Daityas and all the human beings and this whole universe is under that Great Fate. Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses on the Daityas getting back their Śukrācārya, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
