CHAPTER XVI

On the Description of Sandhyā Upāsanā

श्रीनारायण खावा

अथात: श्रूपतां पुण्यं संद्योपासन्मुत्तम् ।

भस्मधारणमाहत्ययं कथितं चैव विस्तत्त् ॥ 1 ॥

प्रातःसंध्याधिनं च कवथिय्यामि तेउच ।

प्रातःसंध्यां सन्तर्जयं मध्याङ्गे मध्याभक्ततम् ॥ 2 ॥

ससूर्वा पश्ठमां संख्या तिजः संख्या उपासते ।

Nārāyana said: Now I am speaking of the very holy Sandhyopāsanā method of Sandhyā worship of Gayatri, the Presiding Deity of the morning, midday and evening, and of the twice-born. Listen. The greatness of using Bhasma has been described in detail. No further need be stated on the subject. I shall talk, first of all, of the morning Sandhyā. The morning Sandhyā is to be done early in the morning while the stars are visible. When the Sun is in the meridian, the midday Sandhyā is to be performed; and while the Sun is visibly going down, the evening Sandhyā is to be recited over.

तद्भेदानपि वक्ष्यामि श्रुणु देवर्विस्तम ॥ 3 ॥

उत्तमा तारकोपता मध्यमा लुप्तताका ।

अथाया सुर्यसहिता प्रातःसंध्या त्रिधा मता ॥ 4 ॥

उत्तमा सुर्यसहिता मध्यमास्तमिति रखी ।

अथाया तारकोपता सायसंध्या त्रिधा मता ॥ 5 ॥



Now again, the distinctions are made in the above three Sandhyās: The morning Sandhyā with stars seen is the best; with stars disappeared, middling; and with the Sun risen above the horizon, inferior. So the evening Sandhyā, again, is of three kinds: best, middling, and inferior. When the Sun is visibly disappearing, the evening Sandhyā is the best; when the Sun has gone down the horizon, it is middling and when the stars are visible, it is inferior.

विप्रो वृक्षो मूलकान्यत्र संध्या

वेदः सगाडा धर्मकमाणि घनम् ।

तस्मायूल्यं यत्नतो रक्षणीयं

छिन्ने मूले नैव वृक्षो न सगाडा ॥ 6 ॥

संध्या वेन न विज्ञाता संध्या येनानुगासिता ।

जीवमानो भवेष्ट्युर्ये मृत: शा चैव जायते ॥ 7 ॥

The Brāhmaṇas are the root of the Tree, the Sandhyā Vandanam; the Vedas are the branches; the religious actions are the leaves. Therefore its root should be carefully preserved. If the root be cut, no branches or leaves of the tree will remain. That Brāhmaṇa who knows not his Sandhyā or who does not perform the Sandhyās is a living Śūdra. That Brāhmaṇa after his death verily becomes a dog.

तस्मार्त्रितं प्रकर्तेलं संध्योपासनमुतामम् ।

तद्यापेड-रवक्मांद्राविधिकारी भवेत्र हि ॥ 8 ॥

उद्वासात्मयाद्युंथे यावत्स्यादूर्धिकायम् ।

तावत्संधामुपासीत प्रावधितं ततः परम् ॥ 9 ॥

Therefore the Sandhyās must be observed every day. Otherwise no right comes at all to do any action. At the sunrise and the sunset the time for Sandhyā is two Dāndas (48 minutes) and if Sandhyā be not done or rather neglected in the interval, the Prāyaścitta (penance) is to he paid duly (performed duly).

कालातिक्रमणे जाते चतुषार्थीं प्रदायपेत् ।

अथवाछणतं देवीं जपवास उद्यौ तां समाचेत् ॥ 10 ॥

यास्म्यकले तु यत्मर्ग तत्कालाधिष्टी च ताप् ।

संध्यापुयास्प यघानु तत्कालीनं समाचेत् ॥ 11 ॥

If the proper time for Sandhyā expires, one more offering of Arghya is to be made in addition to the three Arghayas daily made or the Gāyatrī is to be repeated one hundred and eight times before the Sandhyā is commenced. In whichever time any action ought to be done, worship, first of all, the Sandhyā Devī, the Presiding Deity of that time and do the actions proper to that time afterwards.

गृहे साधारणा प्रोक्ता गोष्टे के मध्यमा भवेत् ।

नदीतीरे चोतमा स्यादेवीगेते तदुत्तमा ॥ 12 ॥

यतो देया उपासेयं ततो देय्नातु सप्रिधी ।

संध्यात्रयं प्रकर्तैलं तदानंत्याय कल्पते ॥ 13 ॥

Book XI Chapter XVI

The Sandhÿa performed in dwelling houses is ordinary; the Sandhÿa done in enclosures of cows is middling and on the banks of the rivers is good and the Sandhÿa performed before the Devi's temple or the Devi's seat is very excellent. The Sandhyopåsanã ought to be done before the Devi, because that is the worship of the very Devi. The three Sandhÿas done before the Devi give infinitely excellent fruits.

तृत्स्या अपरं दैर्व बाहाणानां न विद्यते ।

न विद्यापासना नित्या न शिवोपासना तथा ॥ १४ ॥

यथा भवेन्महादेव्या गायया: शुतिचोदिता ।

सर्ववैद्यसाम्पृता गायब्यास्तु समर्थना ॥ १ ५ ॥

There is no other work of the Brāhmaṇas better than this Sandhyā. One can rather avoid worshipping Śiva or Viṣṇu; because that is not daily done as obligatory; but the Sandhyopāsanā ought to be done daily. The Gāyatrī of the Great Devi is the Essence of all the mantras in the Vedas. In the Veda Śāstras, the worship of Gāyatrī is most definitely pronounced.

ब्रहादायोर्धि संधायां तं धायांति जपति च ।

वेदा जपति तां नित्यं वेदोपायता ततः सुता ॥ 16 ॥

तस्मालर्वे द्विजा: शात्ञा न शैला न च द्विजाला: ।

आदिष्यानिकुपासते गायर्यों वेदभातरम् ॥ 17 ॥

Brahmā and the other Devas meditate in the Sandhyā times on this Devi Gāyatrī and make a japam of that. The Vedas always make japams of Her. For this reason the Gāyatrī has been mentioned as the object of worship by the Vedas. The Brāhmaṇas are called Śāktas inasmuch as they worship the Primal Śakti (Force) Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas. They are not Śaivas nor Vaiṣṇavas.

आचातः प्राणामवध्ये केशवादिकनामधि: ।

कैशवश्य तथा नारावणो माध्य एव च ॥ १ ८ ॥

गोविदो विधुगेवाय मधुसूदन एव च ।

शिविकमो वामनश शीधतोर्पित ततः परम् ॥ 19 ॥

Firstly make the ordinary ācamana three times, and, while inhaling, drink a little of the water of

ācamana, repeating “Om Keśavāya Svāhā, Om Nārāyaṇāya Svāhā, Om Mādhavāya Svāhā.” Then wash your two hands, repeating “Om Govindāya Namah, Om Viṣnave Namah.” Then by the root of the thumb rub the lips repeating “Om Madhusūdanāya Namah, Om Trivikramāya Namah.” So rub the mouth, repeating “Om Vāmmāya Namah, Om Śridharāya Namah.”

इ्यीकौगः पदानाभो रामोदर अतः परम् ।

संक्षर्णी वासुरेव प्रधृमनेप्रधानिकद्धक: ॥ 20 ॥

पुरुषोत्तमाधोक्षजै च नारसिंहोउच्छततक्षा ।

जनादंद उपे-त्ररूण हरि: कृष्णोर्जनासक्षा ॥ 21 ॥

उंकारपूरकं नाम चतुर्विणीसरंख्या ।

स्वाहानै: प्राग्येषातृरि: मानो: स्पर्शेवेता ॥ 22 ॥

कैशवादि विश्रि: पीला द्राम्यां प्रमाणल्येकर्ति ।

मुखं प्रशलत्येवुद्राभ्यां:ज्ञायानुभान्जैन तथा ॥ 23 ॥

एकेन पाणी संग्रोध्य पटावारि शिरोर्पि च ।

संकर्षणादिवेद्यानां द्वारुशांगानि संस्पूर्णेत् ॥ 24 ॥

Then sprinkle water on the left hand, saying "Om Hrṣikeśāya Namah." Sprinkle water on the legs, saying "Om Padmanābhaṇa Namah." Sprinkle water on the head, saying "Om Dāmodarāya Namah." Touch the mouth with the three fingers of the right hand, saying "Om Saṅkarṣanāya Namah." Touch the nostrils with the thumb and forefinger saying "Om Vāsudevāya Namah, Om Pradyumnāya Namah." Touch the eyes with the thumb and ring-finger, saying "Om Aniruddhāya Namah, Om Puruṣottamāya Namah." Touch the ears with the thumb and ringfinger saying "Om Adhoksajāya Namah, Om Nārasimhāya Namah." Touch the navel with the thumb and little finger saying "Om Acyutāya Namah." Touch the breast with the palm, saying "Om Janārdanāya Namah." Touch the head saying "Om Upendrāya Namah." Touch the roots of the two arms saying "Om Haraye Namah, Om Krṣṇāya Namah."

दक्षिणेनेटकं पीत्वा वामेन संस्पृषेद्वधः ।

तावत्र शुध्यते तोयं चावद्याने न स्पृषेत् ॥ 25 ॥

गोकाणंकृतिस्तेन मायमातं जलं पिवेत् ।

ततो न्यूनाधिकं पीत्वा सुरापायी भवेद्विज्ञः ॥ 26 ॥

संहताकुलि तोयं पाणिना दक्षिणेन तु ।

मुक्तोगुहकनिष्ठाघ्यां तेपेणाचमनं विदुः ॥ 27 ॥

While sipping the Acamana water on the right hand, touch the right hand with your left hand; otherwise; the water does not become pure. While doing Acamana, make tke palm and the fingers all united and close, of the form of a Gokarna (the ear of a cow) and spreading the thumb and the little finger, drink the water of the measure of a pea. If a greater or less quantity be sipped, then that would amount to drinking liquor.

प्राणायां ततः कृत्वा प्रणावस्यतिपूर्वकम् ।

गायर्सि शिरसा सार्थतुरीयवदसंयुतम् ॥ 28 ॥

दक्षिणे रेवदेवायुं वामेन पूर्तितेतम् ।

Then thinking of the Pranava, make the Prānāyāma, and repeat mentally the Gāyatrī with her head and the Turīya pāda, i.e., Apojyotih rasomtrām Brahmā Bhurbhuvah svarom. Inhale the air by the left nostril (Pūraka), close both the nostrils (Kumbhaka) and exhale the air, by the right nostril (Recaka). Thus Prānāyāma is effected.

कुंभेन धार्येत्रियं प्राणायामं विदुरुंधा: ॥ 29 ॥

पीडयेद्विष्णा नाडीमगुंछेन तथोत्तम। ।

कनिष्ठानामिकाघवां तु मध्यमां तर्नीं स्थजेत् ॥ 30 ॥

रेचकः पुरकछीव प्राणायामोउव कृमककः ।

प्रोचते सर्वशास्त्रये वृतीभियर्तेमानसः ॥ 31 ॥

While doing Pūraka, Kumbhaka and Recaka repeat the Gāyatrī every time; hold the right nostril with the right thumb and hold the left nostril with the ringfinger and little finger (i.e., don't use forefinger and middle finger). The Yogis who have controlled their minds say that Prānāyāma is effected by the three processes Pūraka, Kumbhaka and Recaka.

रेचक: सुजते वायुं प्रक: प्रयेचुत् तम् ।

सायेने संश्चित्यितत्कुंभकः परिकीर्तितः ॥ ३२ ॥

नीलोलपलदलश्यमां नाभिमध्ये प्रतिशित्तम् ।

चतुषुर्षे महात्मानं प्रपेक चिंतयेद्वादिम् ॥ ३३ ॥

The external air is inhaled in Pūraka; air is not exhaled nor inhaled (it is retained inside) in Kumbhaka; and air is exhaled in Recaka. While doing Pūraka, meditate on the navel, the four-armed high-souled Viṣṇu, of the blue colour (Śyāma) like the blue lotus.

कृष्मके तु इद्धिष्याने छायोतु कमलासनम् ।

प्रजापति जगत्राधं चतुर्वेकं पितामहम् ॥ 34 ॥

रेचके शंकरं छायोल्लाद्यं महेश्वम् ।

गूढ़स्कफ्टिकसंकाशं निर्मलं पापनाशनम् ॥ 35 ॥

While doing Kumbhaka, meditate in the heart lotus the four-faced grandsire Brahmā Prajāpati, the Creator seated on the lotus and while doing Recaka meditate, on the fore-head, on the white sin-destroying Śaṅkara, pure as crystal.

पूरके विष्यासुव्यं कृम्भके बहाणो गतिम् ।

रेचकेन तृतीयं तु प्राप्यवार्धीवर्ग भर ॥ ३६ ॥

पौराणाद्यनाथं च प्रोक्ते देवर्षिस्तम ।

श्रीतामादन्यातं च शृणु पाणवाई मुने ॥ ३७ ॥

In Pūraka, the union with Viṣṇu is obtained; in Kumbhaka, the knowledge of Brahmā is attained and in Recaka, the highest position of Iśvara (Śiva) is attained. This is the method of Ācamana according to the Purāṇas. Now I am speaking of the all sin destroying Vaidik Ācamana. Listen.

प्राणवं पूर्वमुच्चार्यां गतयां तु तदित्यचम् ।

पादादौ व्याह्तीतितः श्रीतायनमनुयते ॥ 38 ॥

गायर्स सिसला सार्थी जंवट्याद्धातिपूर्विकाम् ।

प्रतिणप्रावसंयुक्ति जितयं प्राणसंयमः ॥ 39 ॥

Reciting the Gāyatrī mantra “Om Bhurbhuvah,” sip a little water; this is the Vaidik Ācamana after repeating the seven great Vyāhrtis Om Bhub; Om Bhuvah, Om Svah, Om Mahah, Om Janah, Om Tapah, Om Satyam, repeat Gāyatrī and the head of the Gāyatrī Āpojyoti Rasomītam Brahmā Bhurbhuvah svarom and practise Prānāyāma three times.

(सलक्षणं तु प्राणानामायामं कीर्त्यतेऽधुना ।
नानापापैकशमनं महापुण्यफलप्रदम् ॥)
पञ्चाङ्गुलीभिर्नासाग्रं पीडयेत्प्रणवेन तु ।
सर्वपापहरा मुद्रा वानप्रस्थगृहस्थयोः ॥ ४०॥

कनिष्ठानमिकांगुरुहैपैलेश ब्रह्माचारिण: ।

आणिक्षेति तिषुभि: प्रोक्षणं स्यात्कुणोदकैः ॥ 41 ॥

ऋगंते मार्जनं कुयांत्यादाने वा समाहितः ।

नवप्रणवपुनेन आपोहिष्ठ्यनेन तु ॥ 42 ॥

Hereby all sins are destroyed and all virtues spring. Now another sort of Prānāyāma Mudrā is described: The Vānaprasths and Grhasthas would do Prānāyāma with five fingers, holding the tip of the nose; the Brahmācāris and Yatis would do Prānāyāma with the thumbs, little finger, and ring finger (avoiding middle and fore). Now I am speaking of the Āghamaṣana Mārjana mantra. Listen. The Mantra of this Mārjana is “Āpohiṣṭhā Maybohuvah, etc.”

नर्येवंधे मार्जेनि संवल्सरमुद्वम् ।

तत आचमनं कृता सूर्योषिति पिबेदय: ॥ 43 ॥

अंतःकरणसंघिन्नं पापं तस्य विनर्यस्ति ।

प्राणेत्रे न्याह्तिभियोग्यता प्रणावाछ्या ॥ 44 ॥

There are three mantras in this. There are three Pādas in every mantra, prefix Om to every pāda (thus nine times Om is to be prefixed); at the end of every pāda sprinkle water on the head with the sacrificial thread and the Kuśa grass. Or at the end of every mantra do so. By the above Mārjana (cleaning) the sins of one hundred years are instantly destroyed. Then making Ācamana (taking a sip of water to rinse the mouth before worship), repeat the three Mantras “Om Sūryaśca mā manyuśca, etc.”

आपोहिष्ठिति सूक्तेन मार्जनं चैव कारयेत् ।

उद्यूल्य दक्षिणे हते जलं गोकर्णवलृते ॥ 4 5 ॥

नीत्वा तं नासिकमांத் तु वामकुळीं समोद्यम् ।

पुरुषं कृष्णवर्णं च ऋतं चेति पठेततः ॥ 46 ॥

By this act, the mental sins are destroyed. As mārjana is done with Pranava, Vyārithits, and Gāyatrī, so make Mārjana by the three mantras “Apohisṭhā, etc.” Make your right palm of the shape of a cow’s ear; take water in it and carry it before your nose and think thus: “There is a terrible

sinful person in my left abdomen, his colour is dark black and he is horrible looking."

द्रुपदां वा ऋचं पड्यात्र्यनासापुटेन च ।

श्रासमार्गेन तं पचपानयेक्नरारिणि ॥ 47 ॥

नावलोकवैव तद्धारि वायभातोउपनि क्षित्यत ।

नियाघं तु शरीर मे संसातमिति भावयेत् ॥ 48 ॥

Recite, then, the mantras “Om ritamca satyamcābhidhyāt, etc.” and “Drupādādiva Mumucāna, etc.” and bring that Sinful Person through your right nostril to the water in the palm. Don’t look at that water; throw it away on a bit of stone to your left. And think that you are now sinless.

उत्थाय तु ततः पादौ ही समी सश्रियोजयेत ।

जल्जार्लि गृहीत्या तु तर्जन्यगुहर्वर्जन् ॥ 49 ॥

वीक्ष्य भानुं श्रिपोद्वारि गायाश्या वाधियांतिज् ।

शिवारं मृगिणातूलंकि विे गोपो.उद्यमोपेने ॥ 50 ॥

Next, rising from the seat, keep your two feet horizontal and with the fingers save forefinger and thumb, take a palmful of water and with your face towards the Sun, recite the Gāyatri three times and offer water to the Sun three times. Thus, O Muni! The method of offering the Arghyas has been mentioned to you.

ततः प्रदिष्णां कुर्बासवादित्यमंत्रतः ।

मध्याहे सकृदेव स्यासे-्ययोगेस्तु जिवारतः ॥ 51 ॥

ईशप्रम्: प्रभाते तु मध्याहे दारडवल्स्थतः ।

आसने चोपविष्ठसु तिजः सारयं क्षिपेदपः ॥ 52 ॥

Then circumambulate, repeating the Sūrya Mantra. The one thing to be noted in offering Arghyas is this: Offer once in the midday, and three times in the morning and three times in the evening. While offering the Arghya in the morning, bend yourself a little low; in offering the arghya in the midday, stand up; and while offering the arghya in the evening, it can be done while sitting.

उदकं प्रशिषेशमात्तकारणमतः श्रणु ।

शिशलकोटो महावीरा मंदेहा नाग राक्षसः ॥ 53 ॥

Now I will tell you why the Arghya is offered to the Sun. Hear. Thirty Koti Rāksasas known as

the Mandehas, always roam on the path of the Sun (the mental Sun also).

क्रतनो दारुणा योग: सूर्यमिच्छती खादितुम् ।

ततो देवाणग: सर्वे त्रस्यश तपोधनाः ॥ 54 ॥

उपासते महासंधां प्रक्षियंन्युद्रकाजल्पि ।

दहान्ते तेन दैत्यासे वज्रीभूतेन वारिण ॥ 55 ॥

They are great heroes, treacherous and ferocious. They always try to devour the Sun, while they assume terrible forms. For this reason the Devas and the Rsis combined offer the water with their folded hands to the Sun, while they perform the great Sandhyā Upāsanā. The water thus offered, becomes transformed into the thunderbolt and burns the heads of the cruel demons (and throws them on the island Mandehāruṇa).

एतस्माल्काणाएघुग: संध्या निव्यमुपासते ।

महापुषयस्य जननं संधोपासनमीरितम् ॥ ५६ ॥

अध्याक्षभूतमंगेजेयं प्रोच्यते शृषु नार्ति ।

यदुच्चारणमारेण सांगं संध्याकर्भ भवेत् ॥ ५७ ॥

Therefore the Brāhmaṇas daily do their Sandhyopāsanā. Infinite merits accrue from this Sandhyā Upāsanā. O Nārada! Now I am speaking to you of the Mantras pertaining to the Arghya. No sooner they are pronounced the full effects of performing the Sandhyās are obtained.

सोउहमकॉम्बन्हं ज्योतिरात्मा ज्योतिरहं शिवः ।

आमव्योतिरहं शुक्रलः सर्वेज्योति संरोज्यमूष्म ॥ 58 ॥

आगच्छ वरदे देहि गायत्रि बहुस्तपिणि ।

जपानुश्रान्सिद्वार्यं प्रविश्य हृदयं मम ॥ 59 ॥

I am That Sun; I am That Light; I am That Ātman (Self); I am Śiva; I am the Light of Ātman; I am clear and transparently white; I am of the nature of all energy; and I am of the nature of Rāsa (the sweetness, all the sweet sentiments). O Devi! O Gāyatrī! O Thou! Who art of the nature of Brahma! Let Thee come and preside in my heart to grant me success in this Japa Karma.

प्रतिष्ठ देवि गत्थं पुरनामानाय च ।

अर्थ्यै पु देवि गत्नयं प्रविष्य हृदयं म्म ॥ 60 ॥

ततः शुद्धस्यले नैजामानं स्थायदेव्युयः ।

तज्ञाकृष्ट जपेयश्राद्रायसीं वेदमातनम् ॥ 61 ॥

O Devi! O Gāyatrī! Entering into my heart, go out again with this water. But Thou wouldst have to come again. Sit thus on a pure seat and with a single intent repeat the Gāyatrī, the Mother of the Vedas.

अत्रैव खेची मुत्रा प्राणायामोत्तरं मुने ।

प्रातःसंध्याधिपानो च कीर्तिता सुनिपुढ़न ॥ 62 ॥

तत्रामार्थ प्रवक्ष्यामि सार्तं श्रणु नारद ।

चित्रं चरिते खे यस्माजिज्ञा चरिते खे गता ॥ 63 ॥

घुवोरतर्नात दृष्टिशूत्रा भवति खेची ।

न चासनं सिद्धमरं न कुभ्यसद्गोर्निलः ॥ 64 ॥

O Muni! In this Sandhyopāsanā, the Khecarī Mudrā ought to be done after practising the Prāṇāyāma. Hear now the meaning of the Khecarī Mudrā. When the soul of a being leaves the objects of senses, it roams in the Ākāśa, i.e., it becomes aimless when the tongue also goes to the Ākāśa and roams there; and then the sight is fixed between the eyebrows; this is called the Khecarī Mudrā. There is no Āśana (seat) equal to Siddhāśana and there is no Vāyu (air) equal to the Kumbhaka Vāyu (suspension of air in the body).

न खेचरीसामा मुझा सत्यं सत्यं च नारद ।

घंटावत्पणीच्चारात्रायुं निजित्य नतन्तः ॥ 65 ॥

स्थिपासने स्थितो भृत्वा निरत्कारनिधमः ।

लक्षणं नारदमुने शपुण सिद्धासनस्य च ॥ 66 ॥

O Nārada! There is no Mudrā equal to the Khecari Mudrā. One is to pronounce Pranava in Pluta (protracted) accents like the sound of a bell and, suspending his breath, sit quiet motionless in Sthirāsana without any Ahankāra (egoism). O Nārada! I am now talking of Siddhāsana and its characteristic qualities. Hear.

योगस्थानकर्मिभूल्यविदेतं कृत्वा पूर्व वियये—

स्वेषे पादयधैकमेव हृदये कृत्वा समं विद्यहम् ।

स्थाणु: संयमिवैहिधोचल्गुण पशयभुवोतरंत

तिश्छैलदातील योगिगुर्दुरं सिद्धमतसं प्रोचते ॥ 67 ॥

आयातु वरादु देहो आशं बहुतसिंगितम् ।

गायत्री छंदरां मातारिंद बहा जुचसय मे ॥ 68 ॥

Keep one heel below the root of the genital and the other heel below the scrotum; keep the whole

Book XI Chapter XVI

body and breast straight and motionless; withdraw the senses from their objects and look at the point, the pituitary body, between the eyebrows. This posture is called the Siddhāsana and is pleasant to the yogis. After taking this seat, invoke the Gāyatrī. "O Mother of the Vedas! O Gāyatrī! Thou art the Devi granting boons to the Bhaktas. Thou art of the nature of Brahmā.

यदहा कुकते पार्च तदहा प्रतिपुच्यते ।

यद्राया कुकते पार्चं तद्राया प्रतिपुचने ॥ 6 9 ॥

सर्वेर्णं महाद्विक संधायिको सर्यति ।

अजते आमे देखे सर्वदैवि नामोरुत् ने ॥ 70 ॥

Be gracious unto Me. O Devi! Whoever worships Thee in the day gets his day sins destroyed and in the night, night sins destroyed. O Thou! Who art all the letters of the alphabet! O Devi! O Sandhye! O Thou who art of the nature of Vidya! O Sarasvati! O Ajaye! O Thou immortal! Free from disease and decay.

तेजोर्सीत्यादिमंत्रेण देदीमावाह्येततः ।

यत्कृतं त्वदनुढानं ततसर्वे पूर्णमिन्नु पे ॥ ७ १ ॥

ततः शापविभोक्षाय विधानं स्मयागचेत् ।

O Mother! Who art all the Devas! I bow down to Thee." Invoke the Devi again by the mantra "Ojosi, etc.," and then pray: "O Mother! Let my Japam and other acts in Thy worship be fulfilled with success by Thy Grace." Next for the freedom of the curse of Gāyatī, do the things properly.

बहशगपत्नतो विश्वामियस्य च तथैव च ॥ 72 ॥

वसिष्ठगपा इनतेतद्विषियं शापलक्षणम् ।

ब्रहण: सभणेपेव बहणगपो निवर्तते ॥ 73 ॥

विश्वामियसरणाते विश्वामियस्य शपतः ।

वसिष्ठसरणादे तस्य शापो विनर्गयति ॥ 74 ॥

Brahmā gave a curse to Gāyatrī; Viśvāmitra gave a curse to Her and Vasīṣṭha also cursed Her. These are the three curses; they are removed in due order by recollecting Brahmā, Viśvāmitra and Vasīṣṭha.

हृत्यव्यमये पुरुषं पुराणं

सत्यातकं स्वज्ञानत्यक्षपम् ।

ध्यायामि नित्यं परमात्मरसंजं

चिद्रूपमेकं वचसामगमम् ॥ 75 ॥

अथ न्यासविधिं वश्ये संध्याया अंगसंभवम् ।

अंकारं पूर्ववेशोज्य नतो मंगतुदीरयेत् ॥ 76 ॥

Before doing Nyāsa, one ought to collect oneself and remember the Highest Self; think in the lotus of the heart that Puruṣa (Person) who is Truth; who is all this Universe, who is the Highest Self and who is All knowledge and who cannot be comprehended by words. Now I am speaking of the Aṅganyāsa of Sandhyā; Hear. First utter Om and then utter the mantra.

भूरितुकृता च पाठायां ना इन्येव चोच्छित् ।

भुवः पूर्व तु जानुभयं सः कटिष्णां नमो वदेत् ॥ 77 ॥

मह्नार्थे जनश्रैव हदयाय तततलपः ।

कंठाय च ततः सर्व ललाटे परिकतीर्वेत् ॥ 78 ॥

Touch the two legs, saying "Om Bhubhāddābhyaṃ namah"

Touch the knees, saying "Om Bhuva Jānubhyām namah"

Touch the hip, saying "Om Svah Katjbhyām namah"

Touch the navel, saying "Om Maharnābhvai namah"

Touch the heart, saying "Om Janah Hrdayāya namah"

Touch the throat, saying "Om Tapah Kaṇṭhāya namah"

Touch the forehead, saying "Om Satyam Lalātāya namah"

Thus perform the Vyārthiti nyāsa.

अंग्रुहायां तत्वित्रतुलर्जीर्णायं वोरयकम् ।

भगद्विद्वस्य मत्थाणां धीमहीत्येव कौतैतिं ॥ 79 ॥

अनाभाण्यां कौनिष्णायां विधो यो न: पदं वदेत् ।

प्रचोद्यात्कन्युपहलयोर्व-योस्तुषी: ॥ 80 ॥

Next perform the Karānganyāsa thus: Om Tat savituh ramguṣthābhyām namah (referring to the thumb); Om Varenyam Tarjanibhyām namah (referring to the forefinger); Om bhargo devasya madhyamā bhyām namah (referring to the middle finger); Om Dhimahi anāmikābhyām namah (referring to the ringfinger); Om dhīyo yonah,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Kaniṣṭhābyām namah (referring to the little finger); Om pracodayāt kata rala prṣṭhābhyām namah (referring to the upper part and lower part of the palm and all over the body).

ब्रहात्माने तत्सवितुढ़दायय नमस्तथा ।

विष्यात्मने वेरेणं च शिरासे नम इत्यपि ॥ 8 1 ॥

भगों देखस्य रहायने शिषाखरे परिकीर्तिन् ।

ग्रक्यात्माने धीमहीति कवचाय ततः परम् ॥ 8 2 ॥

कालात्मने चियो यो ने जेत्रत्रय उदीरितम् ।

प्रवोद्याच्च सर्वानमे०स्थाय परिकीर्तितम् ॥ 8 3 ॥

Now I am speaking of the Anganyāsa. Hear. “Om tat savitur brahmātmane hrdayāya namah” (referring to the heart). “Om Varenyam Viṣṇvā tmane Śirase namah” (referring to the head); “Om bhargo devasya Rudrātmane Śikhāyai namah” (referring to the crown of the head); Om dhīmahī Śaktyātmane Kavacāya namah (referring to the Kavaca); “Om dhiyoyonah Kālātmane netratrayāya namah” (referring to the three eyes); “Om pracodayāt sarvātmane astrāya namah” (referring to the Astra or armour, protecting the body).

अश्रत्यासमेवाटी कवयाति महापुने ।

गायकीवर्षभूतो न्यास: पाणहर: पर: ॥ 84 ॥

Now I am speaking of the Varṇanyāsa. O Great Munī! Hear. This Varṇanyāsa is performed by the letters in the Gāyatrī mantra. If anybody does this, he becomes freed of sins.

प्राणं प्रवूमुच्चार्यं वर्णनासः प्रकर्षिततः ।

तल्कामादुच्चार्य पादांगुघृदये न्यस्त ॥ 85 ॥

सकारं गृष्णक्योस्तद्विकारं जंपयो-न्यस्ते ।

जान्योस्तुकारि विन्यस्य ऊर्जीक्षि वकारकम् ॥ 86 ॥

रेकारं च गुटे न्यस्य चिकारां लिंग एष च ।

कट्यां यकारमेवात्र भकतां नाभिमंडले ॥ 87 ॥

गोकारं हृदये न्यस्येदेकारं सत्नयोद्धोः ।

वकारं हृदि विद्यस्य स्यकारं कंककुपके ॥ 88 ॥

धीकारं मुखदेशे तु मकारं तालुदेशेक ।

हिकारं नासिकायो तु चिकारं नेमप्रदेते ॥ 89 ॥

भूम्प्ये चैव योकार योकार च ललाटके ।

नकारं वै पूर्वमुखे प्रकारं दक्षिणे मुखे ॥ 90 ॥

चीकारं पश्रिममुखे दकारं चोत्ते मुखे ।

याकारं भूटिन विस्यस तकारं व्यापकं नयते ॥ 91 ॥

"Om Tat namah" on the two toes; (touching them).

"Om sa namah" on the two heels; (touching them).

"Om vi namah" on the legs;

"Om tu namah" on the two knees;

"Om va namah" on the two thighs;

"Om re namah" on the anus;

"Om ni namah" on the generative organ;

"Om ya namah" on the hip;

"Om bha namah" on the navel;

"Om rgo namah on the heart;

"Om de namah" on the breasts;

"Om va namah" on the heart;

"Om sya namah" on the throat;

"Om dhi namah" on the mouth;

"Om ma namah" on the palate;

"Om hi namah" on the tip of the nose;

"Om dhi namah" on the two eyes;

"Om yo namah" on the space between the eyebrows;

"Om yo namah" on the forehead;

"Om nah namah" to the east;

"Om pra namah" to the south;

"Om co namah" on the west;

"Om da namah" on the north;

"Om yā namah" on the head;

"Om ta namah" on the whole body from head to foot.

एत-नासविधि केविघेच्छंति जपतत्यरा: ।

तते ध्यायेम्हाहियाँ जगन्मातर्यिककाम् ॥ 92 ॥

भास्वज्जगाप्रमुत्नाथी कुमारी परमेश्वीम् ।

रक्तिंज्ञासनारूढ़ा रक्तांभुतृषेयनम् ॥ 93 ॥

रक्रमाल्यांबरधरो चतुरायां चतुर्णुम् ।

दिनोंजं खुरुकुवी गालों कुंडिका चैद विधर्षिती ॥ 94 ॥

Some Jāpakas (those who do the Japam) do not approve of the above nyāsa. Thus the Nyāsa is to be done. Then meditate on the Gāyatrī or the

Book XI Chapter XVI

World-Mother. The beauty of the body of the Gāyatrī Devi is like that of the full blown Javā flower. She is seated on the big red lotus on the back of the Hamsa (Flamingo); She is holding the red coloured garland on Her neck and anointed with red coloured ungment. She has four faces; every face has two eyes.

सर्वाभरणसंदीमाप्रवेदाराधायिरப் राम।

हंसपत्रामाह्वनीयमध्यस्खा ब्रहादेवताम् ॥ 95 ॥

चतुष्वदामध्यकृत्रिसे सतर्शिरा मढ़शीम् ।

अनिवक्ता क्रशिज्ञा विद्युचित्ता तु भावयेत् ॥ 96 ॥

ब्रहा तु कवचे यसा गोत्र संखायनं स्तुतम् ।

On her four hands are a wreath of flowers, a sacrificial ladle, a bead, and a Kamandalu. She is blazing with all sorts of ornaments. From the Devi Gāyatrī has originated first the Rgveda. Brahmā worships the virgin Gāyatrī; on the idea of Śrī Parameśvarī Gāyatrī has four feet. The Rgveda is one; the Yajurveda is the second, the Sāmaveda is the third and the Atharva veda is the fourth foot. The Gāyatrī has eight bellies; the east side is the one; the south is the second; the west is the third; the north is the fourth; the zenith is the fifth; the nadir is the sixth; the intermediate space is the seventh and all the corners are the eighth belly. Gāyatrī has seven Śīras (heads); Vyākaraṇam (Grammar) is one; Śīskaś is the second (that Aṅga of the Veda, the science which teaches the proper pronunciation of words and laws of euphony); Kalpa is the third (the Vedāṅga which lays down the ritual and prescribes rules for ceremonial and sacrificial acts); Nirukta is the fourth (the Vedāṅga that contains glossarial explanation of obscure words, especially those occurring in the Vedas); Jyotish or astronomy is the fifth; Itihāsa (history) and Purāṇas is the sixth head; and Upaniṣads is the seventh head. Agni (fire) is the mouth of Gāyatrī; Rudra is the Sīkhā (the chief part); Her gotra (lineage) is Sānkhyāyana; Viṣṇu is the heart of Gāyatrī and Brahmā is the armour of Gāyatrī.

आदिव्यमंडलोत:स्थां धायेदेर्षी महेश्वीम ॥ 97 ॥

एवं ध्याता विधानेन गायकी वेदभातमम् ।

ततो मुत्रा: प्रकृतीत वेद्या: प्रीतिकता: शुभा: ॥ 98 ॥

Think of this Maheśvari Gāyatrī in the middle of the Solar Orb. Meditating on the Gāyatrī Devi as above, the devotee should shew the following twenty-four Mudrās (signs by the fingers, etc., in religious worship) for the satisfaction of the Devi:

समुखं संपुटे चैव वित्ति विस्तृतं तथा ।

दिमुखं जिसुखं चैव चतुकं पंचकं तथा ॥ 99 ॥

पपमुखाधीमुखं चैव व्यापकांजलिकं तथा ।

गरकंटं यमपाणं च प्रथितं संमुखोन्मुखम् ॥ 100 ॥

विलयंं भृमुकं चैव मतस्यं कृपं वारकम् ।

सिंहाक्रांतं महाक्रांतं मुत्रं पत्नलं तथा ॥ 101 ॥

(1) Sammukha.; (2) Samputa; (3) Vitata (4) Visītrā; (5) Dvimukha; (6) Trimukha; (7) Caturmukha; (8) Pañcamukha; (9) Saṃmukha; (10) Adhomukha; (11) Vyāpaka; (12) Afjali; (13) Śakata (14) Yamapāśa; (15) fingers intertwined end to end; (16) Vilamba (17) Muṣṭika; (18) Matsya; (19) Kūrma; (20) Varāha; (21) Simhākrānta; (22) Mahākrānta; (23) Mudgara; (24) Pallava.

चतुविंशतिमुत्राक्ष याव्यान: संप्रदर्शयेत् ।

शताक्षरां च गायर्यां सकुटावर्गतैनसृधी: ॥ 102 ॥

चतुविंशत्यक्षापि गायवा: कॉर्तितानि हि ।

जातवेदसनाम्पी च ऋचभुच्चायेततः ॥ 103 ॥

स्वेबकस्थवभावूच गायर्जी शतवर्गिका ।

भवतीयं महापुणयोसकृजया बुधीरिम् ॥ 104 ॥

Next make japam once only of one hundred syllabled Gāyatrī. Thus twenty-four sy. labled Sāvitrī, “Jātavedase sunavāma, etc.,” forty-four syllabled mantra; and the thirty-two syllabled mantra, “Tryamvakam yajāmahe, etc.” These three mantras united make up one hundred lettered Gāyatrī. (The full context of the last Mantra is this: Om Haum Om yum saḥ—Trayambakam yajāmahe Sugandhim Puṣti Vardhanam. Urbhārukamiva bandhanān mītyo mūksiya ma mṛtāt Bhur Bhuvah. Svarom Yum Svāh Bhurbhuvah Svarom Haum.)

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

<table><tr><td>अंकारं पूर्वमुच्चार्यं भूर्भूव: स्वतर्धैव च ।</td></tr><tr><td>चतूरिंशस्यारं च गायर्गी प्रोच्चेत्ततः ॥ 105 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>एवं नित्यं जपं कुयदिबाडणो विगुपर्णवः ।</td></tr><tr><td>स समयं फलं प्रायः संध्याया: सुखमेघते ॥ 106 ॥</td></tr><tr><td>इति श्रीमद्रोभोगावते महापुराणो एकादशरकंचे</td></tr><tr><td>शोडशो3स्थायः ॥ 16 ॥</td></tr></table>

Next make japam of Bhurbhuvaha Svah, twenty four lettered Gāyatrī with Om. O Nārada! The

Brāhmaṇas are to perform daily the Sandhyopāsānā repeating Gāyatrī, completely adopting the rules above prescribed and then he will be able to enjoy completely pleasures, happiness and bliss.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the description of Sandhyā Upāsana in the

Mahāpūraṇam Śrimaddevibhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

