[Ch 16 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke: O best of Munis! How did Viṣṇu, of wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him by Bhṛgu? what were His different incarnations in different Manvantaras respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly narrate those dis-trostying deeds of Hari in His several incarnations, that are the source of happiness, peace and welfare to all humanity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke :-- O best of Munis! How did Viṣṇu, of wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him by Bhṛgu? what were His different incarnations in different Manvantaras respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly narrate those sin-destroying deeds of Hari in His several incarnations, that are the source of happiness, peace and welfare to all humanity.

[Ch 16 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān Hari which He had in the several Manvantaras and in the several Yugas respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān Hari which He had in the several Manvantaras and in

[Ch 16 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He did in the various incarnations.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He did in the various incarnations.

[Ch 16 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Cāksuṣa Manvantara, the Bhagavān Hari took the incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Nārāyaṇa, were widely celebrated in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Cākṣusa Manvantara, the Bhagavān Hari took the incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Nārāyaṇa, were widely celebrated in this world.

[Ch 16 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara, under the reign of Vaivasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Dattātreya, in the shape of the son of Atri Rsi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, in the present Vaīvasvata Manvantara, under the reign of Vaīvasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Dattātreya, in the shape of the son of Atrī Ṛṣi.

[Ch 16 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Anasūyā the wife of Atri, was desirous to have, as her sons, the three Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her desires, the Devas took their births in her womb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Anasūyā the wife of Atrī, was desirous to have, as her sons, the three Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her desires, the Devas took their births in her womb.

[Ch 16 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ansūyā, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women and on her praying, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra the Trinity at once agreed to become her sons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Anasūyā, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women and on her praying, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra the Trinity at once agreed to become her sons.

[Ch 16 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattātreya and Rudra was born as Durvāsā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattātreya and Rudra was

[Ch 16 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavān assumed the beautiful double form in one, the upper part resembling a lion the lower part a human being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavān assumed the beautiful double form in one, the upper part resembling a lion and the lower part a human being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas.

[Ch 16 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It was to kill Hiranyakaśipu that the Bhagavān Hari assumed this appearance, wonderful even to the Devas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It was to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu that the Bhagavān Hari assumed this appearance, wonderful even to the Devas.

[Ch 16 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the Tretā Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the Bhagavān incarnated as Vāmana, (the Dwarf), the son of Maharṣī Kaśyapa, to curb the power of Bali.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the Tretā Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the Bhagavān incarnated as Vāmana ( the Dwarf), the son of Maharṣi Kaśyapa, to curb the power of Bali.

[Ch 16 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while he was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Pātāla, (the lower regions).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while he was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Pātāla (the lower regions).

[Ch 16 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Tretā Yuga, Śrī Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Paraśurāma, very powerful and the son of Jamadagni Rsi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Tretā Yuga, Śrī Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Paraśurāma, very powerful and the son of Jamadagnī Ṛṣi.

[Ch 16 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the conqueror of his senses. He extirpated the Kṣattriya race and gave the whole world over to the high minded Rṣi Kaśyapa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the conqueror of his senses. He extirpated the Kṣattriya race and gave the whole world over to the high minded Ṛṣi Kaśyapa.

[Ch 16 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! He is the Paraśurāma, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation of Hari, and the doer of wonderful deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! He is the Paraśurāma, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation of Hari, and the doer of wonderful deeds.

[Ch 16 Verse 17-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After that the Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Rāma, the son of Daśaratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, He incarnated as the very powerful Arjuna and Śri Kṛṣna, the Anisās of Nara Nārāyana. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born; and they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. O king! Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the requirements of Prakṛti. O King! These three worlds are under the control of Prakṛti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After that the Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Rāma, the son of Daśaratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, He incarnated as the very powerful Arjuṇa and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Aṃśas of Nara Nārāyaṇa. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born; and they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kurukṣettra. O king! Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the requirements of Prakriti. O King! These three worlds are under the control of Prakriti.

[Ch 16 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whatever the Prakrti wishes at any time, She can fashion the world in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with the Word Divine, the Highest Śakti, to please the Puruṣa, without any cessation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whatever the Prakriti wishes at any time, She can fashion the world in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with the Word Divine, the Highest Śakti, to please the Puruṣa, without any cessation.

[Ch 16 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavān, the Highest, above all the qualities of Māyā, formless, all pervading, difficult to be conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, created these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested Himself as the Trinity, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa in the shape of the three qualities Satīva, Rajas and Tamas, and which is called the Highest Prakṛti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavān, the Highest, above all the qualities of Māyā, formless, all pervading, difficult to be conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, created these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested Himself as the Trinity, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa in the shape of the three qualities Sāttva, Rājas and Tāmas, and which is called the Highest Prakriti.

[Ch 16 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This all auspicious Prakṛti shines differently according to the differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakṛti, the Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds and is destroying them at the end of the Kalpas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This all auspicious Prakriti shines differently according to the differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakriti, the Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds and is destroying them at the end of the Kalpas.

[Ch 16 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakrti. Brahmā creates, Viṣṇu preserves, and the all-auspicious God Śankara destroys the worlds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakriti, Brahmā creates, Viṣṇu preserves, and the all-auspicious God Śaṅkara destroys the worlds.

[Ch 16 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It was She That gave birth to Kākutstha, the best of the kings; and to conquer the Dānavas, She placed him at a certain place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It was She That gave birth to Kākutstha, the best of the kings; and to conquer the Dānavas, She placed him at a certain place.

[Ch 16 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world, enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus exist in the world. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa, on the Birth of the several Avatāras of Visnu and their deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world, enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus exist in the world. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa, on the Birth of the several Avatāras of Viṣṇu and their deeds.
