CHAPTER XVI

On the Birth of the Several Avatāras of Viṣṇu

जनमेजय उवाच

भूगुणापान्यनिश्र हेराद्धृतकर्मण: । अवतारतः कर्थे जाताः कस्मिन्मवन्तरे विभो ॥ १ ॥ विस्त्तगघ्रद्ध धर्मेन अवतारकर्थ होरः । पाचनागक्षीं बह्यब्छृतां सर्वसुखावहामू ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya spoke: O best of Munis! How did Viṣṇu, of wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him by Bhṛgu? what were His different incarnations in different Manvantaras respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O Brāhmaṇa! Kindly narrate those dis-trostying deeds of Hari in His several incarnations, that are the source of happiness, peace and welfare to all humanity.

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राज्यव्यायी अवतान्त् हरेयां।

यस्मिन्यन्ते जाता युगे यस्मित्रायिधि ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān Hari which He

had in the several Manvantaras and in the several Yugas respectively.

येन रूपेण यत्कार्यं कृतं नारायणेन वै ।

तत्वयं नृप वध्यामि संक्षेणेत तत्वापून ।। ४ ।।

I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He did in the various incarnations.

धर्मदैयवालतोरो भृच्छाक्ष्ये मनुसभ्यवे ।

ननताराणे धर्मपुत्री छातारी महीत्ते ॥ ५ ॥

In the Cāksuṣa Manvantara, the Bhagavān Hari took the incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Nārāyaṇa, were widely celebrated in this world.

अथ वैव्यस्ताखोउस्मिन्द्रतीये तु युगे पुनः ।

दन्तायोदयततोउरंः पुवत्यमामद्धरि: ॥ 6 ॥

Then, in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara, under the reign of Vaivasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Dattātreya, in the shape of the son of Atri Rsi.

बहा विष्यानुसथा रुद्रस्योदगी देवसत्तमाः ।

पुत्रविमयान्देवास्तवायोर्धिया वृत्ताः ॥ 7 ॥

Anasūyā the wife of Atri, was desirous to have,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

as her sons, the three Devas Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her desires, the Devas took their births in her womb.

अनसूयाश्रियली वच सतीनापुसा सती ।

यसा सप्राधिता देया: पुत्रल्यमागंस्वयः ॥ 8 ॥

Ansūyā, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women and on her praying, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra the Trinity at once agreed to become her sons.

ब्रह्मा प्रभृतसोमरूपसृद्धताजेयो हृति: स्वयम् ।

दुर्वीमा रूहरूपोर्सी पुरन्तं ते प्रयेदेर ॥ 9 ॥

Brahmā was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattātreya and Rudra was born as Durvāsā.

गृसिंहस्यावातास्तु देवकायार्थसिद्धये ।

चतुर्थे तु युगे जातो द्विष्ठाक्पो मनोहरः ॥ 10 ॥

In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavān assumed the beautiful double form in one, the upper part resembling a lion the lower part a human being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas.

हिरण्यकाशिणो: सम्यवधाय भगवान् हरि: ।

वक्र केयं नारसिंहं देववानां विस्मयप्रद् ॥ १ १ ॥

It was to kill Hiranyakaśipu that the Bhagavān Hari assumed this appearance, wonderful even to the Devas.

बलेनिंवमनाधाय ऋषे० तेत्रातुगे तथा ।

चकार कर्व भगवान् वामनं कश्यपानुनेः ॥ १ २ ॥

In the Tretā Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the Bhagavān incarnated as Vāmana, (the Dwarf), the son of Maharṣī Kaśyapa, to curb the power of Bali.

छलचित्या मखे भूपं राज्यं तस्य जहार ह ।

वाताले स्वाययामास वलिं वामनस्तध्यूक् ॥ १३ ॥

The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while he was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Pātāla, (the lower regions).

युगे चैकानविक्षेण द्वे तात्ये घे भगवान् हरि: ।

जमदर्भिनुक्ती जातो रामो नाम महावलः ॥ १४ ॥

Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Tretā Yuga, Śrī Bhagavān Hari incarnated as

Paraśurāma, very powerful and the son of Jamadagni Rsi.

क्षत्रियांतकरः श्रीमान्सल्यादी जितोंद्रियः ।

दत्तवामेदिति कृतसां कदयपाय महामने ॥ 15 ॥

He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the conqueror of his senses. He

extirpated the Kṣattriya race and gave the whole world over to the high minded Rṣi Kaśyapa.

यो वै परयुगामाखो हेरद्धुतकर्मण: ।

अवतारस्टु राजेन्द्र कवितः यापतगतः ॥ 16 ॥

O king! He is the Paraśurāma, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation of Hari, and the doer of wonderful deeds.

जेतायुगे रपोर्वरी गामो दर्शरायतमतः ।

नत्नारायणांगे ही जातौ भृति महावती ॥ 17 ॥

अष्टाधिंगे युगे शस्ती द्वारपेज्ञनगोरिणी ।

धरायावताराथाँ जातौ कृष्णाज्ञी भृति ॥ 18 ॥

कृतवर्तौ महापुब्दे कुर्वेत्रेजितदारुणम् ।

एवं युगे युगे राजत्रवतगा हरेः किल ॥ 19 ॥

भवन्ति बहवः कामं प्रकृतैतनुपलतः ।

प्रकृतरखितं सर्वे वर्गोतजजगतयम् ॥ 20 ॥

After that the Bhagavān Hari incarnated as Rāma, the son of Daśaratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvāpara Yuga, He incarnated as the very powerful Arjuna and Śri Kṛṣna, the Anisās of Nara Nārāyana. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born; and they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. O king! Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the requirements of Prakṛti. O King! These three worlds are under the control of Prakṛti.

यथेच्छति तदेवेयं भ्रमयत्निजां जगत् ।

पुर्षस्य प्रियार्थी सा रचयत्यखितं जगत् ॥ 21 ॥

Whatever the Prakrti wishes at any time, She can fashion the world in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with the Word Divine, the Highest Śakti, to please the Puruṣa, without any cessation.

दूर्वा पुरा हि भगवाझ्मदोतच्चारम् ।

सर्वादि: सर्वांश्रासी दुर्जेय: परमोड्ययः ॥ 22 ॥

Book IV Chapter XVII

निरालम्बो निराकारो नि:स्यूढ़ा परावर: ।

उपधितिस्थिति भाति यच्या: सा प्रकृति: परा ॥ 23 ॥

In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavān, the Highest, above all the qualities of Māyā, formless, all pervading, difficult to be conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, created these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested Himself as the Trinity, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa in the shape of the three qualities Satīva, Rajas and Tamas, and which is called the Highest Prakṛti.

उत्पत्तिकालयोगाता विभा भाति शिवा तत ।

सा विश्व कुन्ते कामं सा पालयति कामाद् ॥ 24 ॥

This all auspicious Prakṛti shines differently according to the differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakṛti, the Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds and is destroying them at the end of the Kalpas.

कल्यान्ते संहृत्येव विरूपा विश्वभोहिनि ।

तया युक्तो3सुबद्धृद्धा विष्णु: पालि तयाधिति: ॥ 25 ॥

O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakrti. Brahmā creates, Viṣṇu preserves, and the all-auspicious God Śankara destroys the worlds.

रुद: संहृते कामं तया सभमिलतः शिवः ।

सा चेवोत्याङ्काकुल्यं पुरा वे नुपसतमम् ॥ 26 ॥

It was She That gave birth to Kākutstha, the best of the kings; and to conquer the Dānavas, She placed him at a certain place.

कुत्रचित्स्थाययामास दानवानां जयाय च ।

एवमर्भिश्छ संसारे सुखदुःखात्विताः क्रिकल ।

भवित्न प्राणिनः सर्वे विधितन्त्रनियन्त्रतः ॥ 27 ॥

ड्रिति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे चतुर्यकन्थे

षोडशोरध्याः: 11 16 11

O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world, enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus exist in the world. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa, on the Birth of the several Avatāras of Visnu and their deeds.

Book IV Chapter XVII

