CHAPTER I

On the Superiority of Rudra Over Viṣṇu

སྐལ་བྱིན་

भवता कथितं सूत महदारख्यानुक्तमम् ।

कृष्णाय चरितं दिख्यं सर्वपातकनाशम् ॥ १ ॥

सन्देडोउ महाभाग वासुदेवकधानके ।

जातवे नः प्रोच्यमाने विस्तरणे महामते ॥ २ ॥

The Rsis said: “The great legendary story, the life of Śrī Krṣṇa, supremely divine, destructive of all sins, has been narrated by you, O Sūta! But, O Blessed One! You, though highly intelligent, have dwelt on it not at great length; hence many doubts are cropping in our minds.

चने गत्वा तपस्तवं वासुदेवेन दुष्कम् ।

विष्णोश्वातरेण शिवत्यागाधनं कृतम् ॥ ३ ॥

वरप्रदानं देया च पार्वत्य यकृतं पुरः ।

जनमान्तुङ्ग पूर्णायाः श्रीद्योआं अंशपूर्वता ॥ 4 ॥

ईंध्रोगपि कृष्णोन कुतस्ती सम्पूर्वजतौ ।

न्यन्ता वा किमसत्यस्य तद्वे संगरो मम ॥ 5 ॥

A very difficult tapasyā was performed by Vāsudeva, part incarnate of Viṣṇu, who had to go to forest to worship Śiva. Next, it has been known that the Devi Pārvati, the part incarnate of the Great Mother, the Mother of the universe, the Supreme, and Perfect offered boons to Śri Krṣṇa. How did it then come to pass that Śri Krṣṇa, being himself the God, had to worship Pārvati and Mahādeva? Is it that Śri Krṣṇa was inferior to Mahādeva and Pārvati? This is our doubt."

सूत उवाच

श्यूघ्रं कारणं तत्र मया व्यास श्रुतं च चत् ।

प्रवंतीम महाभागाः कथां कृष्णगुणानिताम् ॥ ६ ॥

ब्रुतान्तं व्यासतः श्रुत्वा वैरादीमुताजस्त्वा ।

पुनः पप्रच्छ मेधावी सन्देहं परमं गतः ॥ ७ ॥

Sūta spoke: “Hear then, the reasons, O noble Rīsi! that I heard from Vyāsa; I will now sing before you those meritorious deeds of Śrī Krṣṇa.” The son of Pariksit, the intelligent Janamejaya had also the same doubts that you now have, when he heard the story before from Vyāsa; and he asked the same questions that you now ask.

जनमेव उवाच

सप्यक्सत्यवतीसूने आुतं परमकारणम् ।

तथापि मनसो वृत्ति: संशयं न विमुईति ॥ 8 ॥

कृष्णोनाराधितः शम्भुस्तपतत्वात्रिदाकाणम् ।

विसयोउं मद्राभाग देवदेवेन विष्णुना ॥ 9 ॥

Janamejaya said: “O son of Satyavatī! I have heard from you much about the Supreme Goddess, the Highest Cause; still the doubts are not leaving me. O Fortunate One! Kṛṣṇa the Deva of the Devas, the Viṣṇu incarnate, worshipped Sambhu and had to perform dire penances; this is my great wonder!

यः सर्वात्मासि सर्वैश: सर्वसिद्धप्रद: प्रशु: ।

स कर्व कृताव्योरे तप: प्राकृतबद्धरि: ॥ 10 ॥

He is the soul of all the Jivas, the One Ruler and Lord of this world and He is able to confer all

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

the Siddhis; how is it, then, that the Lord Hari had to perform very difficult asceticism like an ordinary mortal.

जनकर्तूं क्षम: कृष्णस्वधा पालयितुं क्षम: ।

संडुर्गायि कस्माल दारुणं तप आवर्त् ॥ १ १ ॥

He who is able to create this universe, moving and un-moving, He who is able to preserve and destroy it, why did He practise such a terrible penance."

व्यास उवाच

सत्यमुक्ते त्वया राजनासुरेदो जनादीनः ।

शमः सर्वेषु कार्येषु देवानां दैत्यसूदनः ॥ १२ ॥

Vyāsa said: “True it has been said by you that Vāsudeva, the Janārdana, is the destroyer of the Daityas and He is able to create and preserve the Devas and do all other acts for them.

तथापि मानुवं देह्माश्रभ: परमेश्वः ।

कृतवान्मनुषान्यावल्याणीप्रस्मापाश्रितान् ॥ 13 ॥

But the Great Lord assumed a human body; therefore he had to perform his duties like a man and observe the Varna and Śārama Dharmas pertaining to human beings.

युद्धानां पूर्नं चैव गुरूपादाभिवन्दनम् ।

ब्राह्माणां तथा सेवा देवतातारधनं तथा ॥ 14 ॥

गोके शोकाधिपोग्रह हर्ष हंस्यमुवर्ति: ।

दैनं नानप्रवादाश्र ऋषीष कामोपसेवनम् ॥ 15 ॥

Respecting the elderly persons, worshipping the spiritual teachers, doing service to the Brāhmanas, adoring and propitiating the Devas, feeling sorrow at times of sorrow, feeling pleasure at times of happiness, feeling dejection or expressing censure or scandal, or having sexual intercourse with women, in other words, to feel lust, anger, greediness and other passions when their proper time arises.

कामः क्रोधस्तथा लोधः काले काले भवन्ति है ।

तथा गृणमये देहे निर्णणत्वं कर्ध भवेत् ॥ १ ६ ॥

All these are natural to all human beings; how can, then, Śri Kṛṣṇa though intrinsically of pure qualities, become Nirguṇa (devoid of human

qualities) when he assumed a human body which is Saguna, i.e., with qualities.

सीब्तीशपजाइघातथा ब्राह्मणशपजात् ।

निधनं याद्वानां तु कृष्णदेहस्म योचनम् ॥ 17 ॥

हरणं तुरुन्तं तद्धान्त्वनीनां नराधिय ।

अजुन्स्यास्वमोक्षे च कर्तीबाव्त तस्करेषु च ॥ 18 ॥

अज्ञलं हरणे गेहातन्यधूनानिकृद्धोः ।

एवं भानुपदेशे3स्मिनानुपं खतु चेहितम् ॥ 19 ॥

O Ruler of men! The extinction of the Yādava race by the curse of Gāndhāri, the daughter of Subala, and the curse of a Brāhmin, Krṣna's leaving his human coil, the stealing away of his wives, the robbing of their wealth on the way by the dacoits of the Ābhīra tribe, Ajuna's becoming powerless to hurl any weapons on those dacoits, Krṣna's not knowing anything about the stealing away of Pradyumna and Aniruddha from his Dvārakā palace, these all correspond verily to exertions and failings appropriate to human bodies.

विष्णोरंगशतारोरंस्मातायमानुनेलथा ।

अंगजे वासुदेवेउत्र किं चित्र शिवसेवने ॥ २० ॥

स हि सर्वेशुते देयो विष्णोपरि च कारणम् ।

सुयुतस्थाननाथ: स विष्णुना च प्रयुक्ति: ॥ 21 ॥

Again the Rsi Nārāyaṇa is the part incarnate of Viṣṇu, and Vāsudeva is the part incarnate of the Rsi Nārāyaṇa; hence what wonder is there, if Vāsudeva be seen to adore and propitiate Śiva as the God of gods; and He is the Lord of all the causal bodies that exist in the state of Sushpti (deep sleep). In this respect, Śiva is the creator of Viṣṇu and Viṣṇu worships Him in this light.

तदोर्भपूता कृष्णाइास्नैः कर्ण न स पुरस्ते ।

अकातो भगवान्बहाय्याकार: स्याद्धि: स्वयम् ॥ 22 ॥

मकातो भगवानुश्रीउपधर्माता मेहक्षी ।

Rāma, Krṣna and others are all part incarnations of Viṣṇu; so there is no wonder if they worship Śiva. The letter A is Bhagavān Brahma; the letter “U” is Bhagavān Hari; the letter “M” is Bhagavān Rudra and the half letter m is Maheśvarī, the Supreme Mother of the universe.

Book V Chapter I

उत्तरोतरभावेनाप्युतमचं स्मृतं बुद्धे: ॥ 23 ॥

उतः सर्वेषु शाखेशु देथी वसंतांनमा स्मृता ।

अधमात्रा स्थित तिनया यानुच्चायां विशेषतः ॥ 24 ॥

Therefore, consider Viṣnu superiter to Brahmā; they again consider Rudra superior to Viṣnu and Maheśvari (Turiya State) again superior to Rudra. The speciality of the half letter is that it can never be uttered; it is the symbol of the Eternal Devi. In all, therefore, the superiority of the Devi is established.

विष्योपधिको रूदी विष्युस्ते बहणोर्धिकः।

तस्मार संशयः कार्यः कृष्णेन शिवपूजने ॥ 25 ॥

इच्छया बहणो वक्यात्रद्वाराथयुद्धभी ।

Visnu is superior to Brahmā; Rudra is superior to Visnu. Therefore no doubt can arise in Krṣna's worshipping Śiva. It is through the will of Śiva that a second Rudra originated from the forehead of Brahmā to offer boons (i.e., to Brahmā).

मूलहन्धस्यांभृतो महनामा ब्रितीयकः ॥ 26 ॥

सोर्पि पूर्णोर्सित सर्वेभी मूलहन्य का कथा ।

देवीतच्चस्य साझिश्यानुतमचं स्मृतं शिवे ॥ 27 ॥

This second Rudra is venerable and entitled to all worship; what to speak of the First Rudra? O King! It is through the proximity of the Devi that the importance and superiority of Śiva is thus established.

अवतारा हरेरेखं प्रभवन्ति चुंगे युगे ।

योगमायाप्रभावेण नात्र कार्य विचारणा ॥ 28 ॥

Thus the incarnations of Hari arise in yugas after yugas through the intervention of the Yoga Māyā; so there is no discussion on this point.

या नेरपक्षपरिसडृतनेन सम्यविश्वं

सुज्ज्वाति हन्त निगुहभावा ।

सैया कृतोत सततं ईहिषण्यूतोग-

त्रानावतारकलने धरिभ्यमानान् ॥ 29 ॥

Why to Acyuta alone, to Brahmā and Śiva also She gives troubles for getting involved into incarnations. She the Yoga Māyā who is indirectly, with the twinkings of Her eyes, creating, preserving and destroying this universe.

सूतीगृहाद्वजनमध्यनया नियुक्ते

संगीतितश्व भवने यपुणालराः ।

संप्रापितश मधुर्ग विनिवीतितश

श्रीहारकाप्रणयने ननुं भीतिधतः ॥ 30 ॥

It is the Yoga Māyā that caused Krṣṇa to be transferred from his lying-in-chamber to the village Vraja and then protected him in the house of the cowherd Nanda; afterwards took him to Mathurā for the destruction of Kaṇisa, whence he was again out of Jarāsandha's fear to the city of Dvārkā.

निर्माय षोडगसहस्णताधिकासता

नार्योघ समतताः स्वकलासमुचाः ।

तासां विलासवर्गगं तु विधाय कामं

दासीकृती हि भगवाननयापनन्तः ॥ 31 ॥

It is She that created from Her Ownself the eight Naikās (the leading mistresses) and also sixteen thousand and fifty women for the pleasure and enjoyment of Krṣna Bhagavān, the incarnation of Ananta (Viṣṇu Bhagavān); thus Krṣna Bhagavān was made completely subservient to them just like a perfect slave.

एकासिप बन्यनिवधी युवती समर्था

पुंसो यथा सुद्वलोहमयं तु दाम ।

किं नाम घोडागसहस्रशताध्रकाश

तं स्वीकृतं शुकामिवातिविन्तन्यन्ति ॥ 32 ॥

साजाजितीक्षणतने मुदान्यतेन प्राप्त

सुरैप्रवर्न हरिणा तत्वानीम् ।

कृत्वा भूयं भयवता विह्नासल्णागीश:

प्रियासदनभूषणतां य आप ॥ 33 ॥

When a young woman, though she is alone, can bind a man down by the network of Māyā, like a strong iron chain, what wonder is there that the sixteen thousand and fifty women would make Krṣṇa play in their hands like a Śuka bird and make him an instrument to serve any purpose that they liked. Śrī Krṣṇa got himself so much under the control of Satyabhāmā that He went gladly under her commands to Indra's heavens to get the Pārijāta flowers. There he had to fight with Indra

and subsequently stole away the Pārijāta tree and gave it to Satyabhāmā as a very valuable ornament to be kept in her room.

यो भीमर्ग है हृतवाक्षिरुपालकादीझुला

विधि निविलतधर्मकृती विधित्युः ।

जग्रह तां निजबलेन च धर्मपन्तीं

कोउसी विधि: परकललहृती विज्ञाना: ॥ 34 ॥

Behold! The same Kṛṣṇa, by His own prowess, defeated Śiśupāla and others for the preservation of religion and then stole away Rukminī, the daughter of Bhima and afterwards married her as his legal wife; where is the rule, then, observed that it is a sin to take away another's wife?

अहंकारशः प्राणी करोति च रुभाणुषम् ।

विमूढो महाङ्गलेन तत्कृतेनासिपतिना ॥ 3 5 ॥

Thus all embodied beings get themselves subdued by Aharinkāra and do acts, good or bad, confounded and deluded by the network of Moha that always drags one down below.

अहंकाराद्धि संजातिमदं स्थावरजघूम् ।

मृत्नाद्धिरहादीनानुप्राप्तुकृतिसभ्यन्ति ॥ 36 ॥

अहक्रापरिस्तची यदा भवति पधजः ।

तदा विमुक्तो भवति नोचेत्सोराकर्मकृत् ॥ 37 ॥

From the Mūlā Prakṛti are born Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Hara and from the Tāmasik Ahanikāra of Prakṛti is created this whole cosmos, moving and non-moving. The lotus-born Brahmā becomes free when he is free from Ahanikāra; otherwise He becomes engaged in this world affairs.

तनुक्तनु विमुक्ती हि बढ़मतद्धगतां गतः ।

न नारी न धर्न गेहं न पुत्रा न सहोदरा: ॥ 38 ॥

बन्थन प्राणिनां राजनहंकारसनु बन्यकः ।

अर्ह कर्ता मया चेरे कृते कार्यं बलैरासः ॥ 39 ॥

When freed from this Ahanrikāra, all the Jivas become free; and their houses, wealth, wives, sons and brothers are quite powerless to tie them down; but when bound by Ahanrikāra, the Jivas come under their control.

कर्णियामि करोयेवं स्वयं कंपतालि प्राणभूत ।

कारणेन विना कार्य न सम्भवति कर्हिंघित् ॥ 40 ॥

O king! This Aharikāra is the cause of bondage to all the beings; “I am the doer, this work is done by my power; or this I will do myself” thinking thus, the embodied beings bring themselves under this bondage.

मथा न दृषयते जातो भूर्यिडेन विना घटः ।

विषयु: पालातिवा विश्रयराहंकारसमन्ति: ॥ 4 1 ॥

An earthen pot cannot be made without earth; no effects can be visible without a cause; consequently Viṣnu is preserving this universe, because of this Ahanṅkāra (imposed on him Prakṛti).

अन्यथा सर्वदा चिन्तांबुधी मानः कर्वं भवेत् ।

अहंकारविमुक्तसु यदा भवति मानवः॥ 42 ॥

The human beings are always drowned in their cares and anxieties simply because they are bound by this Aharīnkāra; when they become free from this Aharīnkāra, their cares and anxieties at once vanish.

अवतारप्रावहैषु कर्थ मज्जेच्छुभाशयः ।

मोहमूलमहंकारः संभारतस्तस्युद्धः ॥ 4 3 ॥ १

अहंकाराविद्वीनानां न मोहो न च संमृति: ।

विविधः पुरुषः प्रोक्तः साचिक्यो राजसस्तथा ॥ 4 4 ॥

तामसन्तु महात्राज ब्रहाविष्युगिशावितु ।

विविध्यास्त्रि राजेन्द्र काजेशादितु सर्वदा ॥ 4 5 ॥

Moha (delusion) comes out of Ahrikākāra; world and the enjoyments thereof come out of Moha; otherwise how can it be accounted for, that Hari and others, the mine of all good and auspiciousness, take their several incarnations in various wombs? Neither Moha nor this world comes to those that are bereft of Ahrikāra. Men are of three kinds, Sāttvik, Rājasik, and Tāmasik; O king! Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva are sprung respectively from the Rājasik, Sāttvik, and Tāmasik Ahankāras,

अहूक्रारः सदा प्रोक्तो युनिभिस्तत्वदर्शिधि: ।

अहूक्रारण तेनैव बढ़ा एते न संशयः ॥ 46 ॥

मायाविमोहिता मन्तः प्रवद्धिन मनीषिणः ।

क्रोति स्वेच्छया विष्णुव्रताननेकः ॥ 47 ॥

Book V Chapter II

मन्तोप्रि दुःखगहने गर्भवासेस्तिसढ़हे ।

न क्लोति माति विद्यान्कयं कुर्मास चक्रभूत् ॥ 48 ॥

In these three, the three Aharinkāras are always to be found, so the Munis, that have realised the Real Essence, declare. They are all bound by this Aharinkāra; there is no doubt in this. The Paṇdits of dull intellect, and deluded by Māyā declare that Viṣṇu takes various incarnations out of his own free will; for when it is seen that men of even intellect do not entertain any desire to enter into the wombs, painful and terrible; how will Viṣṇu, then, the Holder of the discus, like to come into this womb!

कीसत्यादेवकामर्षे लिहुपालसमाकुले ।

स्वेच्छया प्रवर्त्यद्धा गतो हि मभ्युसून: ॥ 49 ॥

वैकुण्ठसदर्तं व्यक्ता भर्षायो सुखं नु किम ।

चिताकोटिमसूथाने दुःखदे विषयमिति ॥ 50 ॥

तपस्त्वा क्रनूकृता दत्वा दानान्यनेकशः ।

न वाईति यातो लोका नभवासं सुखुःखदम् ॥ 51 ॥

The slayer of Madhu, the Vaiṣṇavas say, entered all at once into the wombs of Kausálya and Devakī, full of faeces and other dirty things, of His own free will. But you must think out what happiness can Madhusūdana, quitting his Vaikuntha Heavens, attain in this womb, full of so many troubles, and where arise, like poisons, hundreds of cares and thoughts to torment an

individual! Especially when it is seen that human beings perform asceticism, sacrifice Yajñas and do various charities, that they would avoid thus entering in wombs, which is very painful and terrible.

स कर्ष भगाविष्णु: स्ववगीडज्ञनिदानः ।

गर्भवासरुचिर्याद्वैरल्वगता यदि ॥५२ ॥

जानीति त्वं महाराज योगमायावरो जगत् ।

बह्ञादिस्तंवपर्यन्ते देवमानुषितियम् ॥ ५३ ॥

मायातन्मीतिबब्धा ये बह्वाहिष्युतरयः ।

भ्यन्ति बन्धमायाति लीलाया घोर्णनाभ्यत् ॥ ५४ ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभाग्याते महापुराणे पत्रमकन्ने

प्रभोत्रयाय: 11 1 11

How can Bhagavān Viṣṇu be called independent? If so, He would never have yielded to enter into various wombs. Therefore, O king! Know this that this whole universe is under the control of Yoga Māyā; the Devas, men, birds, what more everything from Brahmā down to a blade of grass are all under the control of Yoga Māyā. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara all are bound by the rope of Her Māyā. So they roam easily by Her Māyā from womb to womb like a spider.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Fifth Book on the superiority of Rudra over Viṣṇu in the Mahā Purānam of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa, consisting of 18,000 verses.

Book V Chapter II

