CHAPTER XXV

On the Quarrels Between Hariscandra and Visvāmitra

सूत उवाच

एकदा तु गतो न्तु बालकैः सहितो बहिः ।

वाराणस्या नालितूरंः रोहिताख्यः कुमारकः ॥ १ ॥

Sūta said: Here, on the other hand, one day the boy Rohitāśva went out with other boys to play at some place close to Kāśī.

क्रीडां कृत्वा ततो दर्भानृहीतुमुपचक्रमे ।

कोमलानत्यमृतांश सगाउऊरन्धनुसासतः ॥ 2 ॥

He first played with the his comrades; he then began to root out and collect, as far as he could, the Darbha (Kuśa) grass, with its ends and which had not deep roots.

आर्यौत्यर्थमित्युक्ता हस्तयुमेन यन्ततः ।

सलक्षणाशु समियो बर्हिंरिमं सलक्षणम् ॥ 3 ॥

पलाशकाशुन्यादाय त्विनहोमाध्यमादात् ।

मस्तके भारकं कृत्वा तिद्धयानः पेदे पेदे ॥ 4 ॥

On being questioned why he was taking the Dharbha grass, Rohita told his comrades that his master was a Brāhmin and that he was collecting them for his satisfaction. Saying this, he began to collect carefully by his hands the sacrificial fuel (Samidhā) and other fuel for the burning purposes.

उदकस्थान्यासाठ तदा बालसूर्णपात्रतः ।

भृत्रि भारत विनिश्रिष्य जलस्थाने तदा शिशुः ॥ ५ ॥

कामातः सलितं पौला विश्रयच च पुतुतकम् ।

वल्मीकोपर विस्पत्थभारो हर्तु प्रचकमे ॥ ६ ॥

He collected the Palāsa-wood for Homa purpose and making it into a bundle with other articles already collected, took it on his head, but at every step he seemed to be fatigued. Feeling thirsty he went to a pool of water close by and keeping his load on the ground went down to drink water.

विश्वामिनाज्ञा तावकृष्णायसों भयावहः ।

महाविषयो महायोरो वल्याकीत्रर्गतस्त्वा ॥ ७ ॥

Drinking water he rested a while and then as he had keep his load on the anthill, he began to take it back on his head, a very poisonous deadly serpent came out suddenly out of that anthill at the order of Visvāmitra.

तेनासी बालको दर्शतदैव च पपात है ।

रोहिताख्य मृतं दूद्धया ययुबीला दिजालयम् ॥ 8 ॥

त्वरिता घयसंविना: प्रोयुस्तन्मातृग्रतः ।

है विध्वासि ते पुत्रः क्रीडां कर्तु बहिरानः ॥ 9 ॥

अस्माधिः सहित्तस संपद्धो गृतसन्तः ।

The snake immediately bit the boy who instantly fell down and died. His comrades seeing Rohitāśva

dead went to the house of the Brāhmin. With much anxiety the boys went soon out of fear, to his mother and said: "O Brāhmin's maidservant! Your son went out with us to play outside; but suddenly a poisonous snake bit him and he is dead.

इति सा तईचः श्रुत्वा वड़पातोपमं तदा ॥ 10 ॥

पचात मृडिता भूमौ छिद्रेश कल्ती यथा ।

अथ तां बाहाणो रुहः पात्पीनेनाथपिच्चत ॥ 11 ॥

मुहूतोंचेतनां प्राप्ता बाहाप्तासामथाब्वीत् ।

Rohita's mother, hearing these cruel words like thunder lightning at once fell down on the ground like a plantain tree, cut of from its roots. The Brāhmīn, then, came and sprinkled water on her face. When she regained her consciousness, the Brāhmīn then angrily spoke:

बाहाण उवाच

अल्वभीकाकर निंदी जानती त्वं निगापुष्टे ॥ 12 ॥

रोदनं कुरुषे दुहे लज्जा ते हृदये न किम् ।

बाहाणेवेन पुत्ता सा न किंचिहास्यमवर्जित् ॥ 13 ॥

"O wicked One! It is very inauspicious to cry at the evening time; especially the disfavour of the Goddess Laksmit (i.e.), the poverty comes to the householder, you know this; why are you then weeping? Have you not a bit of shame in your heart? She made not reply at this.

रोरट ककणं दीन पुत्रणोकेन पीडिता ।

अश्रपूर्णिकृदी दीन धूसरा पुत्नमूद्धजा ॥ १४ ॥

Rather very much immersed in grief for her son, she wept in a pitiful voice. Her body was covered with dust, hairs were dishevelled and her face covered all over with tears from eyes. She constantly wept out of sorrow.

अथ तां कुपित्त विधो राजपत्नीभाषात ।

शिक्स्वां दृष्टे कर्म गृह्म मम कार्य विलुपरि ॥ 15 ॥

अशक्ता चेकर्थ ताई गृह्तां मम तद्धन् ।

एवं निर्भिर्मिता तेन कृत्यावक्ये: पुनः पुनः ॥ 16 ॥

The Brāhmīn, then, became very angry and spoke to the queen: "O Villain! O Wicked! Fie on you. I have bought you for money, yet you are hindering my Juck. If you had this thought that you

Book VII Chapter XXV

would not work under me, why did you take for nothing my money?"

कहिता कारणं प्राह विश्रं गद्रद्या गिरा ।

स्वामिन्मय सुती कालः सपँद्यो गृती बहिः ॥ 17 ॥

अनुज्ञां मे प्रवच्छस्य रहुं याय्यामि वालकम् ।

दुर्वर्ध शर्नं तेन संज्ञातं मम सुझत ॥ 18 ॥

Thus repeatedly scolded by the Brāhmīn, she pitifully cried and spoke to the Brāhmīn in a voice choked with feelings: “O Lord! My son has fallen into the jaws of death, being smitten by a serpent.” O One of good vows! I will never be able to see him. So kindly permit me to go and see my boy.”

इत्युक्त्वा करणं बाला पुनेरे क्वोद है ।

पुस्तां कुपिति विग्रो राजपनीभाषात ॥ १९ ॥

Saying thus, that lady began again to weep in a pitiful voice. The Brāhmin became very angry and spoke thus:

ब्राह्मण उवाच

गंडे दुर्भस्मावारे कि न जानासी पातकम् ।

यत्वामिवतेनं गृहा तस्य कार्व विल्यम्पसि ॥ 20 ॥

नरके पच्चते सोउध महारीरवपूर्वेक ।

“O Cheat! Your conduct is extremely blameable; you do not know how one commits a sin. The man who taking his pay from his master spoils his master’s work, he goes to the terrible hell Raurava and is being scorched there.

प्रियत्वा नरक कस्यं ततोउसी कुककुटो भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥

किम्भनेनाया कार्य धर्मसंकृतिनेच न ।

यस्तु यापरतो मूद्धे: कृते नीचोउनूत: शठः ॥ २२ ॥

तद्वयं निष्कर्ते ततिम्यभवेढ़ीजमिवोषो ।

एहि ते विद्यते किंचित्यलोकभयं वदि ॥ २३ ॥

Living in the Hell for a short while, he is born as a cock. Oritis useless for me to give you this instruction of the Dharma Sastra, for to speak to such to an illiterate, cruel, low, hypocrite and lair and to one addicted to sinful acts is to sow seed on an user land and to see it fruitless. Now if you have any fear for the afterlife, come and do the household affairs.

एवमुक्ता5य सा विधं वेयपाना3ब्रवीह्नः ।

कानण्यं कुंक मे नाथ प्रसीर् सुमुखो भव ॥ 24 ॥

Hearing this, she said to the Brāhmīn, trembling: "O Lord! Be graciously pleased and shew your mercy on a maidservant.

प्रस्थापय मुहुतं मां यावदूरक्ष्यामि बालकम् ।

एवमुक्लाव्य सा मून्ति निपत्य डिजापदायोः ॥ 25 ॥

रोदे कर्णा बाला पुत्रशोकेन पीक्षिता ।

अशह कुर्णिता विधः जोधपरत्क्लोचनः ॥ 26 ॥

Only for a moment I will go to see the dead son of mine; so give me order to go there for a moment." That lady was deeply absorbed with sorrows for her son; then she put her head on the feet of the Brāhmin and with a pitiful voice cried. The angry Brāhmin with eyes reddened then began to speak.

विप्र उवाच

किं ते पुंजेन मे कार्य गृहकर्म कृमच्च मे ।

किं न जानासि मे कोर्ध कशापातफलप्रदम् ॥ 27 ॥

एवमुक्ता स्थिता धीवारुगृहकर्मे चकार है ।

अधीराजो गतस्तस्याः पादाध्येगादिकर्भाने ॥ 28 ॥

“What purpose of mine will be served by your son? Don’t you know about my anger? Have you forgotten about my whipping? So be ready and do my household work without any delay.” Hearing his words, the queen held her patience and began to do the household work. She spent half the night time, when she finished champooing his feet.

ब्राह्मणोनाय सा प्रोक्ता पुरवार्थई जताथुना ।

तस्य दाहादिकं कृत्वा पुनरागच्छ सत्वम् ॥ 29 ॥

न लुप्येत यथा प्रातगृहकां ममेति च ।

ततत्वेकाकिनी राजी विल्वर्ती जगह है ॥ 30 ॥

When this was over, the Brāhmin spoke to her, "You can go now to your son; but see, finish his burning ceremonies and come back quickly. See that my morning works do not suffer." Thus getting the permission, the Queen went at that dead of night to look for her son, alone and weeping.

दृष्ट्या मृत निज पुत्रं घूर्णं गोकेन भीडिता ।

यूथध्घा कुरंशीव विवस्ता सौरभी यथा ॥ 31 ॥

वाराणाया बहिंगत्वा क्षणादुद्धत्वा निजं सुतम् ।

श्यानं रंकबद्धमी काष्टदर्भतृणोपरि ॥ ३२ ॥

Gradually she went out of the precincts of the city of Kaśī and there she saw her son like a poor man's son lying on the ground over leaves and pieces of woods. Seeing her son dead, the humble Queen was very troubled with sorrow like an antelope, straying from its herd and as a cow missing her calf.

विलतापातिङुःखाती शब्द कृत्वा सुनिङुम् ।

एहि मे सम्युक्ते कस्माठीघितो3स वद्धान्न ॥ 33 ॥

आयास्यमिभुखो निव्यमेवेल्युत्वा पुनः पुनः ।

गत्वा स्वलल्यदा तस्य पपातोपरि मुक्तिला ॥ 34 ॥

The Queen Mādhavī then began to lament, in a very pitiful tone, thus: “O my Son! Come once before me; sály why you are angry. Oh! My child! You used to come frequently to me, uttering Ma! Ma! Then why are you not coming now?

पुनः सा चेतनं प्राप्य दोर्ध्यामालियय वाकलम् ।

तमुखे वदने न्यस्य रोर्धातिर्वेस्ताद ॥ 35 ॥

कारभ्यां तात्वं चक्रे मलकस्योदरस्य च ।

हा बाल हा शिजो वस्स हा कुमारक सुन्दर ॥ 36 ॥

Saying thus, she tumbling went and fell over his son. She, regaining her consciousness, embraced her son and placing her face on the face of the child began to weep pitifully. "Oh! My son! Oh! My child! Oh my Kumāra! Oh! My Beautiful!" and began to beat her head and her breast with her hands.

हा राकक गतोर्धिस्त एं पर्येयं वालकं निजम् ।

प्राणोभोर्धिप शरीयांसं भूतले पतितं मृतम् ॥ 37 ॥

तथा उपश्यम्भुर्ष तस्य भृयो जीवितांगकंया ।

निर्जीववदनं जात्वा मूर्दिता निपयात् ॥ 38 ॥

O King! Where are you now? You used to look upon your son dearer then even your life. Your that son is now lying dead on the ground. Come and behold him once. It seems that the son has got back his life. Thus thinking she looked upon his face; but when it looked dead, she fell immediately unconscious.

हस्तेन वदनं गृहा पुनेरेवमभाषत ।

गयनं त्यज हे बाल शीधे जगृहि भीषणम् ॥ 39 ॥

निर्णार्थे घर्वते चेदं शिवागतर्निनादितम् ।

भृतप्रेतिपशगचादिडाकिनीयुवानादितम् ॥ 40 ॥

निर्जाणि ते पतन्यास्त्वमेकस्तु कृत: स्थितः ।

Getting back soon her consciousness, she held his face by her hands and said: "O Child! Rise up from your sleep; awake; now is the dreadful night time; hundreds of jackals are yelling into our ears. Even Pretas, Bhūtas, Piśācas, and Dākinis are roaming in packs and making terribly sounds Hum, Hum. Your comrades returned to their homes just at sunset; Why are you alone remaining here?"

सूत उवाच

एवमुक्त्वा पुनस्त्वी करणं प्रकरीद ॥ 42॥

हा शिशो बाल हा वसर रोहिताख्य कुमारक ।

है पुर प्रतिशादं च केस्मार्चत न प्रपछचसि ॥ ४२ ॥

Sūta said: The thin-bodied queen, thus saying, began to lament “Oh my Child! Oh! My son, Oh! Rohitāśva, O Kumāra, why are you not replying to my words!

तवाहं जननी वसा किं न जानासि पर्य मात् ।

देशुलयागाङ्जवनाशतुपत्र भत्री सविक्रवात् ॥ 43 ॥

Oh my Child! I am your mother; do you not recognise me; look at me once. O Child! I am deprived of my kingdom and exiled from my country; my husband has sold even his body and I am myself reduced to slavery.

यद्रासीताच्य जीवाणि तां दृष्ट्या पुत्र केवतम् ।

ते जन्मसमये विश्रौरिष्टं यचलनागतम् ॥ 44 ॥

दीर्घायुः पूर्णविराजारः पुर्यपौत्रसम्यक्तः ।

- What man is there that can live in this state! I am living simply by seeing your lotus-face. The astrologer who cast your horoscope at your birth, calculated future events in your life; but where? none of them is fructified. They said: That this child will be a hero, warrior, long-lived, very charitable man, and always ready to do the worship of the Devas, Dvijas and the Gurus.

Book VII Chapter XXV

गौर्यैदानरितः सच्ची गुरुदेवडिजारंकः॥ 4 5 ॥

मातापीत्रोस्तु प्रियकृतसत्यवादी जितेन्रयः ।

इत्यादि सकलं जातामसत्यमधूना सुतः ॥ 4 6 ॥

चक्रमत्या वासउतपत्रश्रीवत्सस्वितिकक्रप्रवः ।

तव पाणितले पुर्र कलशधारमं तथा ॥ 4 7 ॥

लक्षणानि तवाधान्यानि लब्द्रसे वानि सन्ति च ।

What more than this that the child will be one paramount sovereign and with his sons and grand will enjoy his kingdom. This boy will be the master of his senses and will fulfil the desires of his father and mother. Oh my Son! Nów all those predictions have turned out false. O Child! You have on your palms so many auspicious, signs, discus, fishes, umbrella, Śri Vatsa, Svastika, flags, Kalaśa (earthen jar), Cāmara and other signs; besides these, various other auspicious omens exist on your hands.

तानि सर्वाणि मोघानि संजातान्यभुना सुत ॥ 48 ॥

हा राजन्यधितीयाश क्र ते राज्यं क्व मन्त्रिणः ।

क्व ते सिंहासनं कंवं कं ते खुवः कव तद्वान् ॥ 49 ॥

क्व साउष्टीया क्व ह्याणीय क्व गाजाश्रध्वजः ।

Are all these become in vain to-day! O Son! You are the Lord of this whole dominion; but where are your that Kingdom now, those ministers that royal throne, that umbrella, that axe, that vast amount of riches, that Ayodhyā city, those palatial buildings, those elephants, horses, and chariots?

सर्वमैतस्तथा पूर्व मां तवक्वा बक्यगतोप्रि ॥ ५० ॥

हा कान्त हा युपागच्छ पशयंे स्वसुतं पिव्यम् ।

येन ते रिगता वक्षः कुकुर्मेनावलैपितम् ॥ ५१ ॥

स्वर्गीराज:पैक्षेविंशगलं मिलनीकृतम् ।

Where have gone yours subjects! O Child! Where have you gone now, quitting all these and even me! O beloved Husband! See the condition of your son who in his early childhood used to move on all fours (the hands and feet) and get up on your broad chest, anointed with Kumkum, and spoil it with dust; O King! Come once and witness the condition of your child who used to press, out of ignorance due to his young age, the Tilaka on your forehead, prepared of Mrganābhi, (musk).

येन ते बालभावेन मृगनान्धिर्विवेलपितः ॥ 52 ॥

श्रिंगतो भालतिलकस्तवाकेक्थने भृपते ।

यस्य वक्त्रं मृदा लिलपं स्टोहाई चृष्वितं मय ॥ 53 ॥

तन्मुखं मधिकालिंयं पश्ये कौटैर्विद्धुपितम् ।

Alas! Flies are now sitting on the lotus face today which I used to kiss over, covered with dirt; the insects are now stinging that. Oh! This I have got to witness now! O King! Come and see once your child is now sleeping on the ground like a poor man's dead son.

हा राजन्यस्य तं पूयं भुवित्यर्थ रंकवन्मुतम् ॥ 54 ॥

हा देव किं मया कृत्यं कृतं पूर्वभवान्ते ।

तस्य कर्मफलयेयं न पागमुपलक्षेय ॥ 55 ॥

हा पुत्र हा शिक्षो वसा हा कुमारक सुन्दर ।

O Fate! What bad act did I commit in my past life, that I have got to suffer so much in this life and I do not get an end of them! O Child! O Son! Oh, my Kumāra! Oh! My Beautiful! what I not be able to see you once any more elsewhere?

एवं तस्य वित्याते ने श्रुत्वा नारपालाका: ॥ 56 ॥

जागुतास्वितास्तास्या: पार्थीमीयु: सुविधिता: ।

The Queen Mādhavī thus lamented very much when the warders of the city, hearing her lamentations awoke and came to her without any delay, greatly astonished.

रंना ऊचुः

का तव बालश्छ कस्यायं पतिले कुः तिहिति ॥ 57 ॥

एकैव निर्भया राजी कस्मात्वमिहः तेरिवि ।

एवयुक्ताउव सा स्तवी न किंधिद्वाक्यमवबौत् ॥ 58 ॥

They asked her thus: "Who are you? Whose son is this? Where is your husband? Why are you weeping here in this dead of night, without any fear?" Though thus questioned, the thin Queen did not reply anything.

भूयो5पि पृष्टा सा तृणी स्वब्धीभृता बभूव ह ।

विललापातिचुःखातां शोकाश्रयतुलोचना ॥ 59 ॥

अथ ते शैंकितास्तरणं रोमांचिततनूरहः ।

संजस्तः प्राहृत्योन्यमुद्धुताव्यपाणयः ॥ 60 ॥

Being again asked, she remained silent; and in the next moment she was pained with extreme

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

agony and began again to cry. Tears flowed incessantly from her two eyes out of her sorrow. The guards then began to suspect her and were greatly afraid. So much that hairs stood on their ends out of terror. They at once raised their arms and began to talk with each other.

नूरं क्ती न भवल्येया सतः किंचित्र भाषते ।

तस्माद्धाया भवेदेया यन्तो बालयातिति ॥ 6 1 ॥

गृभा चेताई किं हात्र निर्णार्य सिंहते बहि: ।

भक्षार्थमनया नृनामाति: कस्यचिष्छु: ॥ 6 2 ॥

When this lady is not giving any sort of reply, she is then certainly not a woman; most probably she will be a Rākṣaṣī, knowing magic and destroying young children. So she should be killed with great attention. If she be not a Rākṣaṣī, then why she should stay in this dead of night outside the city? No doubt, this Rākṣaṣī has brought some one's child to eat here.

इत्युक्चना तैंगीहिता सा गाढे केजेषु सत्वम् ।

भुज्योरपरै श्रेक्षा पालक तथा ॥ 6 3 ॥

खंची यास्यतीतुर्ने बहुभि: शक्रपाणिभि: ।

आक्राय पक्रणे नीता चाण्डालाय समर्पिता ॥ 6 4 ॥

Thus saying, they without any delay, tied her hairs closely and some caught hold of her hand and some caught hold of her neck, saying O Rāksaṣi! where will you go now? The armed men, then dragged her perforce to the house of the Cāndāla and handed her over to him.

हे चाण्डाल बहिंद्धा हासमिषबलायातिनि ।

वध्यतां व्यतयोगेश शीर्ध नीला बाहे:स्थले ॥ 6 5 ॥

All the people said: “O Chief of the Cāndālas! We have caught today outside the city this child eating Rāksaṣi; so you better take her quickly on the slaughter ground and slaughter her.

चाण्डाल: प्रात तां दूष्वा जातेयं लोकविश्रुता ।

न दृष्टुवाँ केनापि लोकाईधान्यनेक्रा ॥ 6 6 ॥

भक्षितान्यनया घरि भवद्धि: पुण्यमर्जितम् ।

ख्यातिविः शाखी लोके गच्छवं च यथावुखम् ॥ 6 7 ।

The Cāndāla looked at her body and said. "This Rāksaṣī is widely celebrating in this world. I know

her from before; but no bodies able to see her. This Māyāvini has devoured many sons of many persons. You all will acquire great merit when she will be slaughtered and your good name will be known to all and will last long. You better now go back to your own homes.

दिङसीबालोगोतीं स्वर्णतैरी च यो नरः ।

अग्निदो वर्मद्याति च मघाये गुरुतत्यम्: ॥ 68 ॥

महाजनवितीघी च तस्य पुण्यप्रदो वर्धः ।

दिजस्यापि सिक्यो वार्पि न दोयो चिद्धते वरे ॥ 69 ॥

The man who kills women, children, cows and Brāhmins, who burns another's house with fire, who destroys the wayfares of others, who steals his Guru's wife, who quarrels with saintly persons, and who drinks wine, if killed, will certainly yield merits to the man who kills him. If such a one be a female or a Brāhmin, no sin will accrue if he or she be slaughtered.

अस्य बधधु मे योग्य इनुसूचना गाढवझभनेः ।

बद्धया केशिष्याकृष्य रज्ञभित्माताउघत् ॥ 70 ॥

हरिश्रुद्रमयोबाच याचा पकया तदा ।

रे दास व्यस्ताभेम चुहात्मा भा विचारय ॥ ७ १ ॥

So it is my paramount duty to kill her." Saying this, the Cāndāla tied her closely and drawing her by her hairs, began to beat her with a rope. The he told to Hariścandra in terse language: "O Slave! Kill her; this woman is by her very nature wicked; so do not judge anything in this matter of killing her."

तखाक्यं भूपति: शुत्वा वघपातोपमं तदा ।

वेपमानोउ वच आपहातं ग्राह कृशवधंगकितः ॥ ७२ ॥

न शकतोउहमिदं कर्तुं ग्रेयं देहि ममापरम् ।

असाध्यमपि यतकर्म तकसीच्छे त्याविदातम् ॥  73 ॥

Hearing these harsh words, like the falling of a thunderbolt, the King shuddered. When he came back to his nature, he fearing lest a woman be killed, said to the Cāndāla: "I am not at all able to carry this order out; so kindly make over this task to some other servant of yours. He will kill her. I will certainly carry out any other order that you would task me to do."

Brook VII Chapter XXV

EE vay तदुक्तं wert श्वपचो वाक्यमब्रवीत्‌ ।

माभचेषीस्त्वं गृहाणासिं वधोऽस्याः पुण्यदो मतः ॥ 74 ॥

ब्रालानामे्र भयदा नेयं रक्ष्या कदाचन ।

तच्छुत्वा वचने तस्य राजा वचनमब्रवीत्‌ ॥ 75 ॥

Thus hearing the King, the Candala said:
“Discard your fear and take the sword; this
Mayavini kills always the children, so to kill her is
meritorious; in no way whatsoever ought she to be
saved.” The King became very sorry and said:

स्त्रियो रक्ष्या प्रयत्मेन न हन्तव्याः कदाचन ।

स्त्रीवधे कीर्तितं urd मुनिभिर्धर्मतत्परैः ॥76 ॥

पुरुषो यः स्त्रियं हन्याज्ज्ञानतोऽपि वा ।

नरके पच्यते सोऽथ महारौरवपूर्वके ॥77॥


"Women should always be protected with care, never to be killed; the more so as the religious Munis have assigned greater sin in the killing of woman. The man who kills consciously or unconsciously females, certainly becomes boiled in the Mahā Raurava hell."

घाण्डाला उवाच

मा वदासिंग रुहाणैने तीक्षण विद्युलमगुभम् ।

यत्रेकसिन्वयं नीते बहूनां तु सुखं भवेत् ॥ 78 ॥

तस्य हिंसा कृता नूनं बहुपुणयप्रत भवेत् ।

भक्षितान्यनया भृति लोके डिंधानि दृष्टया ॥ 79 ॥

तलिष्ठं धयतायोग लोकः स्वस्थो भविष्यत ।

The Cāndāla said: “Don’t you say this; take this sharp sword, lustrous like a lightening; where killing one engenders happiness to many, abundance of merits are acquired in doing that. This wicked fellow has eaten many children of this place; so kill her as early as possible and bring peace happiness to the Kāśī people.

राजोवाच

चाण्डालाधिपते तीघ्रं तत्रं क्षीधवधर्जन् ॥ 80 ॥

आजानतततो यत्नं न कुर्मों क्षीवोघे तव ।

The King said: "O Chief of the Cāndālas! I have taken the difficult vow from my childhood, not to be kill any woman. Therefore I cannot exert myself in this matter of killing the woman as you order.

वाण्डाल वज्च

स्वामिकार्व विज्ञा दुह किं कार्व विज्ञतेपम् ॥ 81 ॥

गृहीला वेतने मेउघ कस्मात्कार्व विल्यपर्यत ।

यः स्वायमितं गृहा स्वामिकार्व विल्युपति ॥ 82 ॥

नरकाजिकपूतितस्तय नासि कल्याग्रुतीरम् ।

The Chāndāla said: “O Wicked Fellow! No work is superior which is not the master’s work. Why then are you cancelling today to carry out my order, when you are taking pay from me. The servant that spoils his master’s work, taking his money, is not freed from the hell even if he remains for ten thousand years there.

राजोवार

चाण्डालानाय मे देहि प्रायम-व्यसूदाकाणम् ॥ 83 ॥

स्वगई बृहि ते शिध्धे प्रातिथव्याम्यसंगयम् ।

घातचित्वा तु ने शगुं त्व दाययामि मेदैन्दीन् ॥ 84 ॥

देवदेवोगी: सिद्धैर्गधर्वेपि संयुतम् ।

देवेऊनप्री जेबाभि निहन्त्य निहितः शरैः ॥ 85 ॥

एतब्छुत्वा ततो वायवं हरिश्छान्मय भुपते: ।

चाण्डाल: कुपितः प्राह वेयमानं महीपतिन् ॥ 86 ॥

The King said: “O Lord of the Cāndāla! Put me to some other task that is very difficult. I will do that easily. Or if you have an enemy, specify and I will kill him no doubt within an instant. I will give you the whole earth by killing him. Even if Indra comes against you with the other Devas, or Dānavas, or Uragas, or Kinnaras, or Siddhas, or Gandharvas, I will slay him with my sharpened arrows, but I will never be able to kill a woman.” The Cāndāla, then, began to tremble with anger at these words and said to the King.

चाण्डाल उवाच

नैतद्धावयं सुधटितं यद्धावयं दासकर्जिततम् ।

चाण्डालदासतां कृत्वा सूराणां भाग्ये सच्चः ।

दास किं बहुना नूनं शृणु मे गततो वचः ॥ 87 ॥

निर्जैज तव चेद्रस्ति किंचित्वापरभं हृदि ।

किमर्थ दासतां गताश्रण्डालस्य तु वेण्यमि ॥ 88 ॥

गृहाणैनं ततः खड्गाम्याच्छिन्नि शिरोअधुबम् ।

एवमुन्त्राश द्वाण्डालो गोड खड्गं न्येवद्वग ॥ 89 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागाते महापुराणो सतमकन्ये हरिश्रद्वीपाखाने

पद्धविशोउवायः 11 25 11

"You are a servant and what you have spoken is not fit for a servant. Working as a slave of a Cāṇḍāla, you are speaking the words of the gods. Therefore, O slave! hear now what I say; no need of exchanging any further words. O Shameless One! If you fear sin a bit why then did you accept the slavery in a Cāṇḍāla's house. Take this sword

and cut off her head." Thus speaking the Cāṇḍāla gave him the axe.

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh

Book on the quarrels between Hariścandra and

Viśvāmitra in the Mahā Purānan,

Śrimaddevī- bhāgavatam, of 18,000 by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

