[Ch 15 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Prahlāda was glad to hear the above words of the high souled Bhārgava.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king Janamejaya! Prahlāda was glad to hear the above words of the high souled Bhārgava.

[Ch 15 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas: Never, in this battle will victory be ours.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas :-- Never, in this battle will victory be ours.

[Ch 15 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the victorious Demons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlāda: What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of us: Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate any shape? Who has created it? Has any body seen Fate? However let us gather strength and fight. You are very intelligent and all knowing. It is proper that you should take our lead in the fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the victorious Demons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlāda :-- What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of us :-- Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate any shape? Who has created it? Has anybody seen Fate? However let us gather strength and fight. You are very intelligent and all knowing; It is proper that you should take our lead in the fight.

[Ch 15 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlada, the great Destroyer of enemies, became the general and challenged the Devas to fight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlāda, the great Destroyer of enemies, became the general and challenged the Devas to fight.

[Ch 15 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing the Asuras in the battlefield, the Devas, dressed with arms and weapons, began to fight with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing the Asuras in the battle field, the Devas, dressed with arms and weapons, began to fight with them.

[Ch 15 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between Indra and Prahlâda; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between Indra and Prahlāda; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished.

[Ch 15 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general Prahlāda, the followers of Śukrācārya, got the victory.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general Prahlāda, the followers of Śukrācārya, got the victory.

[Ch 15 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Indra, advised by their Guru Brhaşpati, began to remember the Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of welfare, the Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the Bestower of freedom, worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Indra, advised by their Guru Bṛhaspati, began to remember the Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of welfare, the Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the Bestower of freedom, worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great devotion.

[Ch 15 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra said! Victory be to the name of the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of conchshell, disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to Thee, the Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine in everything that relates to force, that is described in the Sakti Darśana Śāstras. Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, Thou art the Mahāvidyā (the Supreme Knowledge). Note: There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the Sakti Darśana. There are many Dharma Śāstras. Here Śakti Śāstra is meant. The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross manifestations resolve. The tattvas are Mahābindu, Nāda Śakti, Miśra Bindu, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra said :-- Victory be to the name of the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of conchshell, disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to Thee, the Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine in everything that relates to force, that is described in the Śakti Darśana Śāstras. Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, Thou art the Mahāvidyā (the Supreme Knowledge). 13. There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the Śakti Darśana. There are many Dharma Śāstras. Here Śakti Śāstra is meant. The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross manifestations resolve.

[Ch 15 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O World Mother! Thou art the Mahā Kundalini (the great Serpent Fire); thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou art the Deity of the vital Fire (Prāna); Thou art the Deity of the Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); Thou art the Holy Flame, burning always in the etherial space in the Heart; Salutation to Thee!
NEW CORR ENG ──► O World Mother! Thou art the Mahā Kundalinī (the great Serpent Fire); thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou art the Deity of the vital Fire (Prāṇa); Thou art the Deity of the Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); Thou art the Holy Flame, burning always in the ethereal space in the Heart; Salutation to Thee!

[Ch 15 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamaya, the Prānamaya, the Manomaya, the Vijñānamaya and the Ānandamaya sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller of the Ānandamaya koṣa, Thou art of the nature of Puccha Brahma, the end of Brahma. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ānanda (bliss) unblown, O Mother! Thou art the Deity of all the Upaniṣadas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamāyā, the Prāṇamāyā, the Manomāyā, the Vijñānamāyā and the Ānandamāyā sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller of the Ānanda māyā kosa, Thou art of the nature of Puccha Brahmā, the end of Brahmā. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ānanda (bliss) unblown, O Mother! Thou

[Ch 15 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; protect us. O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! Thou art endowed with all the powers, Thou art our Sole Refuge in this Universe, in times of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong and capable to remove all our dangers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; protect us, O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! Thou art endowed with all the powers, Thou art our Sole Refuge in this Universe, in times of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong and capable to remove all our dangers.

[Ch 15 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really happy; and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows are never removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage and who meditate on Thee always—those pure souls, being free from Ahariñkāra, and free from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this ocean of world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really happy and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows are never removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage and who meditate on Thee always; those pure souls, being free from Ahamkāra, and free from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this ocean of world.

[Ch 15 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever protection is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the distressed; You are the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate of all these worlds; O Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate your qualities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever protection is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the distressed; You are the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate of all these worlds; O Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate your qualities.

[Ch 15 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire, Air, the high minded munis, Āgama, Nigama (the Tantras and the Vedas, are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salaution to Thy Fect.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire, Air, the high minded munis, Āgama, Nigama, the Tantras and the Vedas, are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salutation to Thy Feet.

[Ch 15 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from the fangs of this Samsāra. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot cross this Ocean of Samsāra, where the Birth and Death are the billows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from the fangs of this Samsāra. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot cross this Ocean of Samsāra, where the Birth and Death are the billows.

[Ch 15 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white cāmaras and those that travel always in cars, they in their previous births worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have acquired the effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white cāmaras and those that travel always in cars, they in their previous births worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have acquired the effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion.

[Ch 15 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, those that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by pleasures and enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquetish women, those that go surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider they worshipped Thee in their previous births, and they are now enjoying fruits of their past deeds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, those that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by pleasures and enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquettish women, those that go surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider they worshipped Thee in their previous births, and they are now enjoying fruits of their past deeds.

[Ch 15 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the Universe with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion. Conchshell, disc, club, and lotusses were held by the beautiful eyed Goddess in Her four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and ornamented with divine garlands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the Universe with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion. Conchshell, disc, club, and lotuses were held by the beautiful eyed Goddess in Her four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and ornamented with divine garlands.

[Ch 15 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet words, "Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about your welfare."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet words, “Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about your welfare.”

[Ch 15 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother mounted on a lion, went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, infatuated with pride.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother mounted on a lion, went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, infatuated with pride.

[Ch 15 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the Daityas with their general Prahlāda saw the Goddess before them and were terrified and began to address each other “What are we to do now?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the Daityas with their general Prahlāda saw the Goddess before them and were terrified and began to address each other “What are we to do now?”

[Ch 15 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Candikā Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. She destroyed Mahisāsura and Caṇḍa Munḍa; it was She that killed, in days of yore, Madhu-Kaitabha with evil look.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Candikā Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. She destroyed Mahiṣāsura and Canḍa Munḍa; it was She that killed, in days of yore, Madhukaiṭava with evil look.

[Ch 15 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlāda addressed the Daityas: “It is better not to fight but let us fly away all together.” Then the Daitya Namuci told the Daityas ready to fly away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all with weapons in Her hands.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlāda addressed the Daityas :-- “It is better not to fight but let us fly away all together.” Then the Daitya Namuchi told the Daityas ready to fly away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all with weapons in Her hands.

[Ch 15 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess of the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day to the Patāla."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess of the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day to the Pātāla.”

[Ch 15 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Prahlāda said “I will worship the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix, Preservix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World Mother, and the Assurer of safety to Her devotees.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Prahlāda said “I will worship the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World Mother, and the Assurer of safety to Her devotees.”

[Ch 15 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge, Prahlāda, the devotee of Viṣṇu, began to sing hymns with folded hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge, Prahlāda, the devotee of Viṣṇu, began to sing hymns with folded hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe.

[Ch 15 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra "Hrim" the Refuge of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland of flowers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra “Hrīm” the Refuge of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland of flowers.

[Ch 15 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have sprung from Thee; Brahma, Viṣṇu and others are Creators, Preservers in name only; Thou hast created them all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have sprung from Thee; Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others are Creators, Preservers in name only; Thou hast created them all.

[Ch 15 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahāmāya! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have created the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any difference between the Devas and the Daityas?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mahāmāyā! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have created the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any difference between the Devas and the Daityas?

[Ch 15 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and bad sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the Devas; this is our prayer to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and bad sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the Devas; this is our prayer to you.

[Ch 15 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Purāṇas as the World Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas are.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Purāṇas as the World Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas are.

[Ch 15 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got our interests; therefore there is no difference between the Daityas and the Devas. Therefore if any one makes any difference, it is due to the subtle error.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got our interests; therefore there is no difference between he Daityas and the Devas. Therefore if anyone makes any difference, it is due to the subtle error.

[Ch 15 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other pleasures of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can any difference exist between them and us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other pleasures of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can any difference exist between them and us.

[Ch 15 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! They are the sons of Maharşi Kaśyapa; we also are his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! They are the sons of Maharṣi Kaśyapa; we also are his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us.

[Ch 15 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible any where. Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible anywhere. Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both.

[Ch 15 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations and combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being embodied can possess more qualities than us.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations and combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being embodied can possess more qualities than us.

[Ch 15 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, covetuousness; how then can one expect to remain without any quarrels with others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, covetousness; how then can one expect to remain without any quarrels with others.

[Ch 15 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions different, rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in quarrels with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight against each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions different, rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in quarrels with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight against each other.

[Ch 15 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless one! O Câmunde! Were You not so fond to see our fight, how then, we being brothers are at war against each other. Certainly it is Your Divine Sport.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sinless one! O Cāmunde! Were You not so fond to see our fight, how then, we being brothers are at war against each other. Certainly it is Your Divine Sport.

[Ch 15 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of our incessant quarrels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of our incessant quarrels.

[Ch 15 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsāra; no sensible man can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something (i. e. O Mother, You are the only one that is desideriss; so we can obey your words).
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsāra; no sensible man can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something. (i.e., O Mother, You are the only one that is desireless; so we can obey your words).

[Ch 15 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras conjointly churned the ocean. At that time Viṣṇu, on the plea of distributing the jewel, and the ambrosial nectar, incurred quarrels amongst them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras conjointly churned the ocean. At that time Viṣṇu, on the plea of distributing the jewel, and the ambrosial nectar, iñcurred quarrels amongst them.

[Ch 15 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of the Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world, And it was He that took away the Goddess Lakṣmī, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva women.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of the Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world. And it was He who took away the Goddess Lakṣmī, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva women.

[Ch 15 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airāvata, the flower Pārijāta, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse Uchchaishravā. Thus, through the desires and devices of Vishnu, they got all the excellent things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airāvat, the flower Pārijāt, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse Uccaiśravā. Thus, through the desires and devices of Viṣṇu, they got the excellent things.

[Ch 15 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the Devas had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge Yourself what is the just and unjust thing in this case.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the Devas had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge Yourself what is the just and unjust thing in this case.

[Ch 15 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What is Religion? And where is Religion? And what are the acts done by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? You better examine which party has observed virtue? Who has shown uprightness justice and purity? To whom victory and defeat are due? You are the only one capable to judge all these things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► where is Religion? And what are the acts done by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? You better examine which party has observed virtue? Who has shown uprightness, justice and parity? To whom victory and defeat are due? You are the only one capable to judge all these things.

[Ch 15 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the Mīmārīsakas. If any one considers, one will find the world is the field of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical reasoning only; the followers of the Vedas look to the rules and regulations only; these so called men of gross ideas they acknowledge that this world is created and preserved by the One only, and yet they quarrel amongst each other.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the Mimāmsakas. If any one considers, one will find the world is the field of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical reasoning only; followers of the Vedas look to the rules and regulations only; these so called men of gross ideas they acknowledge that this world is created and preserved by the One only, and yet they quarrel amongst each other.

[Ch 15 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite Sarīsaña, then why would there be difference and quarrels amongst each other? Why is there not seen any agreement in opinion and why do the Sāstras differ and why are there so many differences in the opinions held by the knowers of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite Samsāra, then why would there be differences and quarrels amongst each other? Why is there not seen any agreement in opinion and why do the Śāstras differ and why are there so many differences in the opinions held by the knowers of the Vedas.

[Ch 15 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is selfish; hence arise so many differences between several opinions. There was no one unselfish in this world and there would be no unselfish persons born hereafter.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is selfish; hence arise so many differences between several opinions. There was no one unselfish in this world and there would be no unselfish persons born hereafter.

[Ch 15 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of Brhaspati; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of Gautama; Brhaspati enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and also he outraged his elder brother's wife in her pregnant state and cursed the boy in the womb and made him blind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of Bṛhaspati; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of Gautama; Bṛhaspati enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and also he outraged his elder brother’s wife in her pregnant state and cursed the boy in the womb and made him blind.

[Ch 15 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more to say than Viṣṇu, all full of Sāttvic qualities, severed perforce the head of Rāhu. O Mother! Look to the case of my grandson Bali who used to pay due respects to all, who was the foremost amongst the virtuous, observer of rigorous truth, performer of sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, all-knowing.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more to say than Viṣṇu, all full of Sāttvic qualities, severed perforce the head of Rāhu. O Mother! Look to the case of my grandson Bali who used to pay due respects to all, who was the foremost amongst the virtuous, observer of rigorous truth, performer of sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, all-knowing.

[Ch 15 Verse 62-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The pretender Hari, taking the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation) deceived Bali and took away all his kingdoms. Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon the Deva Viṣṇu as the preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those who are flaterers become victorious in this world; and defeat come to those that speak of Dharma. O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever You like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your protection; kill or save them as You like.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The pretender Hari, taking the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation, deceived Bali and took away all his kingdoms. Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon the Deva Viṣṇu as the preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those who are flatterers become victorious in this world; and defeat come to those that speak of Dharma. 65. O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever You like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your protection; kill or save them as You like.

[Ch 15 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi said: O Demons! Leaves you all the anger arising from this warfare and go without any fear to Pātāla and live there at your ease and happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī said :-- O Demons! Leave you all the anger arising from this warfare and go without any fear to Pātāla and live there at your ease and happiness.

[Ch 15 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere.

[Ch 15 Verse 67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whose mind is avaricious, He does not get peace and happiness, even if he acquires the Triloki. Even, in the golden age, avaricious persons did not get happiness, though they acquired the fruits of their actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whose mind is avaricious, He does not get peace and happiness, even if he acquires the Trilokī. Even, in the golden age, avaricious persons did not get happiness, though they acquired the fruits of their actions.

[Ch 15 Verse 68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My order and leave the earth and go down to the Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My order and leave the earth and go down to the Pātāla.

[Ch 15 Verse 69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: On hearing the Devi's words, the Demons obeyed and bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Pātāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- On hearing the Devī’s words, the Demons obeyed and bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Pātāla.

[Ch 15 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the Devi disappeared; and the Devas went away to their own homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their feelings of enmity towards each other, lived in place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the Devī disappeared; and the Devas went away to their own homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their feelings of enmity towards each other, lived in peace.

[Ch 15 Verse 71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of calamities and reaches the Highest Peace. Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, on the truce between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of calamities and reaches the Highest Peace. Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahā Purāṇam of 18,000 verses, on the truce between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
