CHAPTER XV

On the Truce Between the Daityas and the Devas

व्यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा भार्गवस्य महात्मनः ।

प्रहादस्तु सुसंह्छो वध्व वृनपन्दन ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O king Janamejaya! Prahlāda was glad to hear the above words of the high souled Bhārgava.

त्राला देयं बलिष्ठ च प्रहादस्तावुरावा च ।

कृतंपि युद्धे न जयो भविष्यति कदाचन ॥ 2 ॥

Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas: Never, in this battle will victory be ours.

तदा ते जयिनः प्रीघृदानैवा मदार्थिततः ।

संग्रामस्तु प्रकर्तेथो देई किं न विदामहे ॥ 3 ॥

निरुद्धामानां देई ति प्रधानमसुराधिप ।

केन दृष्टं कव वा दृष्टं कौदृषंगे केन निर्मितम् ॥ 4 ॥

तस्मादुब्दं करीथ्योगे बलमाथाय साम्यन्तम् ।

भवागे देल्वयंरं लं सर्वज्ञोरि महामते ॥ 5 ॥

Then the victorious Demons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlāda: What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of us: Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate any shape? Who has created it? Has any body seen Fate? However let us gather strength and

fight. You are very intelligent and all knowing. It is proper that you should take our lead in the fight.

इतुक्तसैतदा राजप्रहादः प्रवलाहिता ।

सेनातीक्ष तदा भूत्वा देवान् युद्धे समाक्रयत् ॥ 6 ॥

O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlada, the great Destroyer of enemies, became the general and challenged the Devas to fight.

तेक्षि तजासुरान्द्रवहा संग्रामे समुपस्थितान् ।

सर्वे संभृतसंभाग देवास्तानसमयोधयन् ॥ 7 ॥

On seeing the Asuras in the battlefield, the Devas, dressed with arms and weapons, began to fight with them.

संग्रामन्तु तदा घोर: शक्रप्रहादयोरभूत् ।

पूर्णे वर्षशंत तत्र पुनीनां विस्मयावह: ॥ 8 ॥

For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between Indra and Prahlâda; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished.

वर्तमाने महायुढे शुक्रेन प्रतिपालिता: ।

जयमापुस्तदा दैत्याः प्रक्रावप्रमुखा नृप ॥ 9 ॥

O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general Prahlāda, the followers of Śukrācārya, got the victory.

तदेवे-न्नो भुगोर्वक्यासर्वेदुःखविनाशिनीम् ।

सम्मार मनसा देवीं भुक्तिंदां परमां शिवाम् ॥ १० ॥

Then Indra, advised by their Guru Brhaşpati, began to remember the Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of welfare, the Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the Bestower of freedom, worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great devotion.

इन्ह जवाच

जय देयि महामाये शुल्याधिपी चांबिके ।

शंखचक्रमावयवघडूगहलेउंपययदे ॥  १ १ ॥

नमसे घुवेगुओगि शक्तिरूर्गनमकिके ।

दुशतत्वास्थिके मातर्महाविन्दुव्यक्षिपि ॥ १ २ ॥

Indra said! Victory be to the name of the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of conchshell, disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to Thee, the Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine in everything that relates to force, that is described in the Sakti Darśana Śāstras. Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, Thou art the Mahāvidyā (the Supreme Knowledge).

Note: There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the Sakti Darśana. There are many Dharma Śāstras. Here Śakti Śāstra is meant.

The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross manifestations resolve. The tattvas are Mahābindu, Nāda Śakti, Miśra Bindu, etc.

महाकुष्डलिनीकले सचिवादानन्दलिपि।

प्राणानिहोत्रविद्यो ते नगो दीपिशाखामिके ॥ १३ ॥

O World Mother! Thou art the Mahā Kundalini (the great Serpent Fire); thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou art the Deity of the vital Fire (Prāna); Thou art the Deity of the Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); Thou art the Holy Flame, burning always in the etherial space in the Heart; Salutation to Thee!

पढ़कोशान्तराते तुच्छे ब्रह्माखलीणि ।

आनन्दकलिके मात: सर्वोपनिषद्धिति ॥ 14 ॥

Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamaya, the Prānamaya, the Manomaya, the Vijñānamaya and the Ānandamaya sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller of the Ānandamaya koṣa, Thou art of the nature of Puccha Brahma, the end of Brahma. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ānanda (bliss) unblown, O Mother! Thou art the Deity of all the Upaniṣadas.

मातः प्रसीद सुमुखी भव हीनसत्त्वं-

स्वायव नो जननि दैन्यपारजितान् वै ।

त्वं देवि नः शरणादा घुवन प्रमाणा

शक्ताउसि दुःखागमनैस्तिलबीयकुंचे ॥ 15 ॥

O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; protect us. O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! Thou art endowed with all the powers, Thou art our Sole Refuge in this Universe, in times of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong and capable to remove all our dangers.

ध्यार्याति येधि सुखिती नितरां भवन्ति

दुःखात्विता विगतगोक्षभायतशास्त्रये ।

मोक्षार्थिनो विगतमानविष्युकसंगाः

संसाराविर्धितजं प्रतरित संतः ॥ 16 ॥

O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really happy; and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows are never removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage and who meditate on Thee always—those pure souls, being free from Ahariñkāra, and free from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this ocean of world.

लं देवि विश्वजनपि प्रशिक्षभावा

संस्थानाथमुदितासंहिरुपतापा ।

संहरुभेतदिखिलं किल कालकपा

को बेत्ति तेउम्य चरितं ननु मन्दबुद्धि: ॥ 17 ॥

O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever protection is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the distressed; You are the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate of all these worlds; O Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate your qualities.

Book IV Chapter XV

इहा हर्ष शरिद्धशरो हरीष्ठ इन्जो

यमोक्ष वक्षणोजनियमौरी च ।

जातुं भूमा न मुन्योरीप महानुभावा

यम्या: प्रभावमतुलं निगमागमाधि ॥ 18 ॥

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśa, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire, Air, the high minded munis, Āgama, Nigama (the Tantras and the Vedas, are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salaution to Thy Fect.

धन्यास एव तव भक्तिपरा महानतः

संसारयु:खरितृतः सुखसिन्युमानः ।

ये भक्तिभावरहिता न कदापि

दुःखाधोधि जनिक्षयतरंगमुपे तरिति ॥ 19 ॥

Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from the fangs of this Samsāra. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot cross this Ocean of Samsāra, where the Birth and Death are the billows.

ये वीर्यमाना: सित्तवामरेशु

क्रीडन्ति धन्या: शिविकाधिकडा:।

मै: पूजिता त्वं किल पूर्वदैते

नानोषहरिति चिन्तयामि ॥ 20 ॥

O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white cāmaras and those that travel always in cars, they in their previous births worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have acquired the effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion.

ये पूर्यमाना वरावणत्या

विलासिनीर्वृद्विलासयुक्ता:।

सामानकैक्षीपनर्तैर्जलित मन्ये

हि तैन्स्व कि पूजितासि || 21 ||

Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, those that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by pleasures and enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquetish women, those that go surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider they worshipped Thee in their previous births, and they are now enjoying fruits of their past deeds.

व्यास उवाच

एवं स्तुता मघवत्ता देवी विश्वेषृति तदा ।

प्रादुर्बंभृत तत्सा सिंहाकृडा चतुर्भूजा ॥ 22 ॥

गंखचकानदायपात्बिघन्नी चाक्लीचना ।

रक्तबारधा देदी तिव्यमाल्यविष्यपाण ॥ 23 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the Universe with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion. Conchshell, disc, club, and lotusses were held by the beautiful eyed Goddess in Her four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and ornamented with divine garlands.

तानुवाच सुगान्देवी प्रसज्वद्ना नीता ।

भयं रचजुं भो देशः शं विधाये किलतानुपा ॥ 24 ॥

The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet words, "Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about your welfare."

इत्युत्नवा सा तदा देही सिंहास्काठितिसुन्दी ।

जगाम तरसा तर यत्र दैर्या मद्धान्धितः ॥ 25 ॥

Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother mounted on a lion, went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, infatuated with pride.

प्रहादप्रमुखा: सर्वे दूर्वा देर्वी पुरः त्रिवताम् ।

ऊचु: परमरं भीता: किं कतन्यमितमत्तद ॥ 26 ॥

All the Daityas with their general Prahlāda saw the Goddess before them and were terrified and began to address each other “What are we to do now?”

देवं नारायणं चार संप्राप्ता चधिडका किल ।

महिप्रांतकरी नूनं चण्डपुर्णद्विनारिणी ॥ 27 ॥

निहनिययिति नः सर्वान्विका नास संगयः ।

वक्रकृष्णा यया पूर्वे निहतों मधुकेटभी ॥ 28 ॥

This Candikā Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. She destroyed Mahisāsura and Caṇḍa Munḍa; it was She that killed, in days of yore, Madhu-Kaitabha with evil look.

एवं चिन्तातुान् बीक्ष्य प्रह्मादस्तानुवाच है ।

योद्ब्येन यान्तव्य पलाय्य दान्वोतमाः ॥ 29 ॥

नमुचितानुवाचा पलायनपरान्ह ।

हनिष्यति जगन्माता क्षिपता किल हैतिथि: ॥ 30 ॥

Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlāda addressed the Daityas: “It is better not to fight but let us fly away all together.” Then the Daitya Namuci told the Daityas ready to fly away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all with weapons in Her hands.

तथा कुभ महाभाग यथा दुःखं न जायते ।

जजामोउदीय पातालं तां स्तुत्वा तदनुज्ञा ॥ ३ १ ॥

Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess of the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day to the Patāla."

प्रहाद उवाच

स्तोमि देती महामायां सृष्टिश्यन्तकारिणीम् ।

सर्वेषां जननीं शान्धि भक्तानामभयंकीम् ॥ ३२ ॥

Prahlāda said “I will worship the Goddess Mahāmāyā, the Creatrix, Preservix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World Mother, and the Assurer of safety to Her devotees.”

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्चा विद्याभनस्तु प्रहादः परमाध्ययित् ।

तुधव जगतां धार्यी कृताझलिपुटसदा ॥ 33 ॥

Vyāsa said: Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge, Prahlāda, the devotee of Viṣṇu, began to sing hymns with folded hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe.

माला सर्वद्वापाति यस्यां सर्वे चराचरम् ।

सर्वाधिष्ठान्तपारे तस्ये हिंमूर्तेय नमः ॥ 34 ॥

I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra "Hrim" the Refuge of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland of flowers.

त्वस्तः सर्वमिदं विश्वं स्थावतं जंगमं तथा ।

जन्ये निविमगाङ्गाते कतारित्वन विनिर्मितः ॥ ३ ५ ॥

O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have sprung from Thee; Brahma, Viṣṇu and others are Creators, Preservers in name only; Thou hast created them all.

नमो देख महामाये सर्वेधा जननी स्मृता ।

को भेदस्त्व देवेषु दैत्येषु स्वकृतेषु च ॥ ३६ ॥

O Mahāmāya! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have created the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any difference between the Devas and the Daityas?

मातुः पुत्रेषु को भेदोउध्यगुंष शुभेषु च ।

तथैव देवेब्यमातु न कर्तैवस्त्वयोर्जना ॥ 37 ॥

As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and bad sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the Devas; this is our prayer to you.

यादुपासताशुग मातः सुताते दानवा: किल ।

यतस्त्वं विश्वजननी पुराणेषु प्रक्रौतिंता ॥ 38 ॥

O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Purāṇas as the World Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas are.

तेत्रि स्वार्थपरा नूनं तबेव वयमयत् ।

नातरं दैत्यसुर्योपैदोर्धं मोहस्पमवः ॥ 39 ॥

O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got our interests; therefore there is no difference between the Daityas and the Devas. Therefore if any one makes any difference, it is due to the subtle error.

धन्वरादिघोगेषु वयं सत्ता दिवानिगम ।

तथैव देवा देवेशि को घोदोउसुदेवयो: ॥ 40 ॥

O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other pleasures of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can any difference exist between them and us.

तेषि कश्यपदायादा वयं तत्सम्भाव: किल ।

कुतो विरोधसभूतिजिता माततलायुना ॥ 41 ॥

O Mother! They are the sons of Maharşi Kaśyapa; we also are his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us.

न तथा विहितं माततलयि सर्वीमुद्धले ।

साम्यतेव त्वया स्थाया देवेच्यमासु चैव हि ॥ 42 ॥

O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible any where. Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both.

Book IV Chapter XV

गुणधितिकात्सर्वे समुपयज्ञ: सुरासुरा: ।

गुणाधिता यावेयुने कर्थे देहभृतोजभगः ॥ 4 3 ॥

The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations and combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being embodied can possess more qualities than us.

कामः कोधछ लोगश्र सर्वदेषेरु सचित्यः ।

वर्तने सर्वदा तस्मात्ञोत्रियोरी भवेजनः ॥ 4 4 ॥

Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, covetuousness; how then can one expect to remain without any quarrels with others.

त्वया मिथो विरोधोउरं कलित्यः किल कौतुकात् ।

मन्यामाहे विषयेने नूनं सुद्दिद्वक्षया ॥ 4 5 ॥

We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions different, rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in quarrels with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight against each other.

अन्यथा खलु भानुणां विधीयः कीर्णोउनये ।

तं वेत्रेच्छस चामुपडे वीक्षितुं कलहिं किल ॥ 46 ॥

O Sinless one! O Câmunde! Were You not so fond to see our fight, how then, we being brothers are at war against each other. Certainly it is Your Divine Sport.

ज्ञानायि धर्म धर्मे वेधि चाहं शनकतमुम् ।

तथापि कलहोउसाकं भोगार्थ देवि सर्वदा ॥ 47 ॥

O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of our incessant quarrels.

एकः कोर्पि न शास्त्रास्ति संसारे तां चित्रास्थिके ।

सूहावतस्तु कः कर्तुं क्षमते वचनं बुधः ॥ 48 ॥

O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsāra; no sensible man can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something (i. e. O Mother, You are the only one that is desideriss; so we can obey your words).

देवानुरीरयं सिंभूमिधितः समये क्वचित् ।

विष्णुना विहितो भेदः सुधानलच्छनेवे च ॥ 49 ॥

O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras

conjointly churned the ocean. At that time Viṣṇu, on the plea of distributing the jewel, and the ambrosial nectar, incurred quarrels amongst them.

त्वयाउसौ कल्पितः शौरि: पालकल्चे जगदगुरुः ।

तेन तक्षसी: स्वयं लोपागृहीतामसनुस्ति ॥ ५० ॥

O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of the Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world, And it was He that took away the Goddess Lakṣmī, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva women.

ऐरावतलवेढ़ेण पारिताजोर्ध यामधुक ।

सुरैरूच्छे:शबा: सर्व गृहीतं वैण्यावेच्छ्या ॥ 51 ॥

Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airāvata, the flower Pārijāta, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse Uchchaishravā. Thus, through the desires and devices of Vishnu, they got all the excellent things.

अनय तादुर्ग कृत्वा जाता देवासुं माधवः ।

"अन्यायिनः सुग नूनं पश्य तं धर्मक्षणम्।"

संस्थापिता: सुग नूनं विष्णुना बहुमानिना ॥ 52 ॥

O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the Devas had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge Yourself what is the just and unjust thing in this case.

नूनं दैत्या: पराभूवन्यग्र चंधर्तक्षणम् ।

क्व धर्मः कीर्ण्यो धर्म: क्व कार्य क्व च समुत्ना ॥ 53 ॥

What is Religion? And where is Religion? And what are the acts done by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? You better examine which party has observed virtue? Who has shown uprightness justice and purity? To whom victory and defeat are due? You are the only one capable to judge all these things.

कवयासि न कस्याएं सिद्धे मेमापिके मन्त्र।

ताकिका युक्तिवाद्ञा विधिप्रा वेदवादाकः ॥ 54 ॥

उक्ता: सकर्निकं विश्व विवदते जाड़ानकाः ।

Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the Mīmārīsakas. If any one considers, one

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

will find the world is the field of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical reasoning only; the followers of the Vedas look to the rules and regulations only; these so called men of gross ideas they acknowledge that this world is created and preserved by the One only, and yet they quarrel amongst each other.

कर्ता भवति चेद्यम्बस्मोत चितते किन्ति ॥ 55 ॥

वितोध: कीदुगस्तन चैककर्मणि चै निय: ।

वेरेनेकमाति: कममच्छासेध्चपि तथा पुनः ॥ 56 ॥

नैकवाक्यं चवस्तेषामपि वेदिविदां पुनः ।

If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite Sarīsaña, then why would there be difference and quarrels amongst each other? Why is there not seen any agreement in opinion and why do the Sāstras differ and why are there so many differences in the opinions held by the knowers of the Vedas.

यतः स्वार्थपरं सर्वे जनस्थावरजंगमम् ॥ 57 ॥

निःस्पृहः कोर्पि संसारे न भवेवे भविष्यति ।

O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is selfish; hence arise so many differences between several opinions. There was no one unselfish in this world and there would be no unselfish persons born hereafter.

शशिजास्य गुोपोर्षां हेता जात्वा बलादपि ॥ 58 ॥

गौतमस्य तवेज्ञे जानता धर्मनिश्रभ्यम् ।

गुरुणान्तुज्यभावां च भृत्ता भर्षिती बलात् ॥ 59 ॥

ग्रणो भर्षगोत बालः कृतशोधस्वा पुनः ।

Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of Brhaspati; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of Gautama; Brhaspati enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and also he outraged his elder brother's wife in her pregnant state and cursed the boy in the womb and made him blind.

विष्णुना च शिरिश्छत्रं राहोश्रकेश के बलात् ॥ 6 0 ॥

असपार्थ विभा कामं तदा सच्चवताम्विके ।

पौजो धर्मवतां शूर: सत्यवतारपायण: ॥ 6 1 ॥

यज्ञा द्वापणितः शान्तः सर्वैजः सर्वेपूजकः ।

What more to say than Viṣṇu, all full of Sāttvic

qualities, severed perforce the head of Rāhu. O Mother! Look to the case of my grandson Bali who used to pay due respects to all, who was the foremost amongst the virtuous, observer of rigorous truth, performer of sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, all-knowing.

कृत्यास्त्र धावानं रूचे ह्रौणा छलवेदिता ॥ 62 ॥

वडितोउरी बलि: सर्व हतं राज्यं पुरा किल ।

तथापि देवान्यर्थन्यावदिति मनीपिणः ॥ 63 ॥

वद्रति चादुदादांध्र धर्मदादाङ्गयं नातः ।

एवं जात्वा जान्यानार्थेथ्छस तथा कुरु ॥ 64 ॥

गरणा दानवा: सर्वे जक्ति वा स्थ वा पुनः ।

The pretender Hari, taking the form of a dwarf in his Vāmana incarnation) deceived Bali and took away all his kingdoms. Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon the Deva Viṣṇu as the preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those who are flaterers become victorious in this world; and defeat come to those that speak of Dharma.

O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever You like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your protection; kill or save them as You like.

श्रीदेव्यवाच

सर्वे गछळत पातालं तन वारं यथेवितम् ॥ 65 ॥

कुठ्छं दानवा: सर्वे निर्भया गतान्यवः ।

The Devi said: O Demons! Leaves you all the anger arising from this warfare and go without any fear to Pātāla and live there at your ease and happiness.

काल: ग्रीत्योय युधाधिः कारणं स गुषेज्युषे ॥ 66 ॥

सुनिवंदुपराणां हि सुखं सर्वेत्र सर्वेत्र ।

Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere.

त्रैलोक्यस्य च राज्येधिन पे सुखं लोपचेतसामू ॥ 67 ॥

कृते5पि न सुखं पूर्णं स्मयुहाणां फलैपि ।

Whose mind is avaricious, He does not get peace and happiness, even if he acquires the Triloki.

Book IV Chapter XVI

Even, in the golden age, avaricious persons did not get happiness, though they acquired the fruits of their actions.

तस्माचक्यता महीमेतां प्रयांत्वघ महीतलम् ॥ 68 ॥

ममाजां पुरतः कृत्वा सर्वे विगतकल्पया: ।

Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My order and leave the earth and go down to the Pātāla.

म्यास उवाच

तच्छुत्वा वचनं देल्यासतेथ्युत्वा रसातलम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

प्राणम्य दानवा: सर्वे नात: शक्लवाभिराक्रातः ।

Vyāsa said: On hearing the Devi's words, the Demons obeyed and bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Pātāla.

अन्तदीये त्तो देही देवा: स्वभुवनं नतः ॥ 70 ॥

त्यक्त्वा वैरं स्थिता: सर्वे ते तदा देहवदान्वा: ।

Then the Devi disappeared; and the Devas went away to their own homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their feelings of enmity towards each other, lived in place.

एतदाख्यानमिहलं वः श्रणीति वदत्यथा ॥ 71 ॥

सर्वेदुःखविनिभून: प्रयाति पदमुत्तमम् ।

ड्राँते श्रीमदेवीभाग्रतो महापुराणो चतुर्बंकल्ये

पडवशो5धयाः: 11 15 11

O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of calamities and reaches the Highest Peace.

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of Śrimaddevibhāgavatam, the Mahā Purānam of 18,000 verses, on the truce between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IV Chapter XVI

