[Ch 20 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Rsis said: “O Sūta! What did Veda Vyāsa do, when the highest Yogī Śuka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent supernatural powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ṛṣis said :-- “O Sūta! What did Veda Vyāsa do, when the highest Yogi Śūka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent supernatural powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

[Ch 20 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this question, Sūta spoke: “O Rsis! Vyāsa already had with him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vaiśampāyana, Jaimini, Sumantu and others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this question, Sūta spoke :-- O Rishis! Vyāsa already had with him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vaiśampāyana, Jaimini, Sumantu and others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas.

[Ch 20 Verse 4-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After their studies were over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on the earth. Then Vyāsa, seeing that the disciples went to the earth and his son Śuka Deva had gone to the next world, became very much distressed with sorrow and wanted to go to some other place. He then decided to go to his birth place and went to the banks of the Ganges and there remembered his auspicious mother Satyavati, forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and the daughter of a fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain, the source of all happiness and came to his own birth place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After their studies were over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on the earth. Then Vyāsa , seeing that the disciples went to the earth and his son Śūka Deva had got to the next world, became very much distressed with sorrow and wanted to go to some other place. He then decided to go to his birth place and went to the banks of the Ganges and there remembered his auspicious mother Satyavatī, forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and the daughter of a fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain, the source of all happiness and came to his own birth place.

[Ch 20 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Reaching the island where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the beautiful faced, the fisherman's daughter as well the wife of a king. The fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the king Santanu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Reaching the island where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the beautiful faced, the fisherman’s daughter as well the wife of a king. The fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the king Śantanu.

[Ch 20 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then king of fishermen, seeing Vyāsa there, gladly worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with folded palms, thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► the king of fishermen, seeing Vyāsa there, gladly worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with folded palms, thus :--

[Ch 20 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare even to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you have purified my family.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare even to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you have purified my family.

[Ch 20 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmī! Kindly say what for have you come? My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are at your disposal.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmin! Kindly say what for have you come? My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are at your disposal.

[Ch 20 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavati, Vyāsa erected an Śārama on the beautiful banks of the river Sarasvatī and remained there in tapasyā with an enlightened mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavatī, Vyāsa erected an Āśrama on the beautiful banks of the river Sarasvatī and remained there in tapasyā with an enlightened mind.

[Ch 20 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some time elapsed when the highly energetic Śantanu got through his wife Satyavati two sons. Vyāsa Deva considered them as his two brothers and became very glad, though he himself used to live in the forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some time elapsed when the highly energetic Śantanu got through his wife Satyavatī two sons. Vyāsa Deva considered them as his two brothers and became very glad, though he himself used to live in the forest.

[Ch 20 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The first son of king Santanu was Citrāngada, endowed with all auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and tormenting his foes; the second son was Victiravirya; endowed with all qualities. King Śantanu became very happy to get these children. Santanu had one son before through his wife Gaṅgā; he was a great hero and very powerful; and the two sons of Satyavati were equally powerful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The first son of the king Śantanu was Citrāṅgada, endowed with all auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and tormenting his foes; the second son was Vicitra-vīrya; he was endowed with all qualities. The king Śantanu became very happy to get these children. Śantanu had one son before through his wife Gaṅgā; he was a great hero and very powerful; and the two sons of Satyavatī were equally powerful.

[Ch 20 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The high souled Śantanu now seeing the three sons, all endowed with all auspicious qualities, began to think that the Devas were incapable to defeat him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The high souled Śantanu now seeing the three sons, all endowed with all auspicious qualities, began to think that the Devas were incapable to defeat him.

[Ch 20 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After some time, the religious Śantanu quitted his worn-out body as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After some time, the religious Śantanu quitted his worn-out body as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time.

[Ch 20 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After king Śantanu had ascended the heavens, the energetic Bhīsma performed duly his funeral obsequies and gave various things in charity to the Brāhmins.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After the king Śantanu had ascended the Heavens, the energetic Bhīśma performed duly his funeral obsequies and gave various things in charity to the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 20 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He did not accept the kingdom himself; but placed Cittāṅgada on the throne and became known by the name of Devavrata (truthful in vow like the Devas).
NEW CORR ENG ──► He did not accept the kingdom himself; but placed Citrāṅgada on the throne and became known by the name of Devavrata (truthful in vow like the Devas).

[Ch 20 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The pure souled Cittāngada, born of Satyavati became so much powerful. by sheer force of his arms, and became so great a hero that the enemies felt endless troubles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The pure souled Citrāṅgada, born of Satyavatī became so much powerful by sheer force of his arms, and became so great a hero that the enemies felt endless troubles.

[Ch 20 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now once on an occasion, the greatly powerful Citrāngada, surrounded by a great army went on a hunting excursion to the forest in quest of rule, deer etc., when the Gandharva Citrāngada seeing the king on the way, alighted from his chariot.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now once on an occasion, the greatly powerful Citrāṅgada, surrounded by a great army, went on an hunting excursion to the forest in quest of rurū deer, etc., when the Gandarbha Citrāṅgada, seeing the king on the way, alighted from his chariot.

[Ch 20 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred and wide expanse Kuruksetra between the two heroes, both equally powerful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred and wide expanse Kurukṣettra between the two heroes, both equally powerful.

[Ch 20 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the battle, king Citrāngada, the son of Śantanu, was slain by the Gandharva Citrāngada and went up to Heavens. Bhīṣma, born of the womb of Gaṅgā, hearing the above news, expressed his sorrows and, being surrounded by the ministers completed all the funeral obsequies and installed Victiravīrya on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the battle, the king Citrāṅgada, the son of Śantanu was slain by the Gandarbha Citrāṅgada and went up to Heavens. Bhīśma, born of the womb of Gaṅgā, hearing the above news, expressed his sorrows and, being surrounded by the ministers completed all the funeral obsequies and installed Vicitravīrya on the throne.

[Ch 20 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Beautiful Satyavati became very much agitated by the death of her son; but when the ministers and the high-souled spiritual teachers consoled her, she become glad when she saw that her youngest son became king. Vyāsa Deva, too, felt himself exceedingly glad to hear that his youngest brother had been made king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► beautiful Satyavatī became very much agitated by the death of her son; but when the ministers and the highsouled spiritual teachers consoled her, she became glad when she saw that her youngest son became king. Vyāsa Deva, too, felt himself glad to hear that his youngest brother had been made king.

[Ch 20 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After some time when the all-auspicious, Satyavati's son Victiravīrya attained his youth, Bhīsma began to think of his marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After some time when the all auspicious, Satyavatī’s son Vicītravīrya attained his youth, Bhīśma began to think of his marriage.

[Ch 20 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time the king of Kási (Kásiñaj) called an assembly Swayamvara (where the kings are invited and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her three daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and the same time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time the king of Kāsī (Kāśīrāj) called an assembly Svayamvara (where the kings are invited and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her three daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and the same time.

[Ch 20 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from various countries were invited there in the assembly; and, worshipped duly, they went and decorated the hall.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from various countries were invited there in the assembly; and, worshipped duly, they went and decorated the hall.

[Ch 20 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At that time the highly energetic fiery Bhisma alöne, mounting on his chariot, attacked the infantry and cavalry, and defeated all the kings assembled there, and perforce carried away the three daughters of Kâśirâja and took them to Hanstināpur.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At that time the highly energetic fiery Bhīśma alone, mounting on his chariot, attacked the infantry and cavalry, and defeated all the kings assembled there, and perforce carried away the three daughters of Kāśīrāj and took them to Hastināpur.

[Ch 20 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhīṣma behaved towards those three daughters as if they were mothers, sisters or daughters and informed Satyavati without any delay of everything that had happened.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhīśma behaved towards those three daughters as if they were mothers, sisters or daughters and informed Satyavatī without any delay of everything that had happened.

[Ch 20 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then he called for the astrologers and Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then he called for the astrologers and Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage.

[Ch 20 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the religious Bhīsma wanted Victivāriya to marry them. At this time, the eldest daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the Ganga's son Bhīsma:
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the religious Bhīśma wanted Vicitravīrya to marry them. At this time, the eldest daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the Gaṅgā’s son Bhīśma :--

[Ch 20 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Gaṅgā's son, the illustrious son of your family and the best of the Kurus! You are the best knower of Dharma; therefore, what more shall I say to you. In the Svayamvara assembly I mentally selected Śālva and it struck me that he, too, looked on me with a very loving heart towards me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “O Gaṅgā’s son, the illustrious son of your family and the best of the Kurus! You are the best knower of Dharma; therefore what more shall I say to you. In the Svayamvara assembly I mentally selected Śālva and it struck me that he, too, looked on me with a very loving heart towards me.

[Ch 20 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O tormentor of foes? Now do what is fit for that sacred family; O Ganga's son! Not only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are also the foremost of the religious. Śalva mentally wanted to marry me; now do as you like".
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O tormentor of foes! Now do what is fit for that sacred family; O Gaṅgā’s son! Not only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are also the foremost of the religious. Sālva mentally wanted to marry me; now do as you like.”

[Ch 20 Verse 40-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhīsma asked the aged Brāmins, ministers and his mother what ought to be done now and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter: "O beautiful one! You can go wherever you like." Thus saying, Bhīsma released her. Then the beautiful daughter of Kāśirāja went to the house of Śāvarāja and expressed to him her heart's desire: வின்புஞ்சிவ மிஷியை எவனறக்கை தம்மை: அாளாதியை மஞ்சான் நஞ்சாளங் கர்ம ம 43 11 O great king! Knowing me attached to yourself, Bhisma has quitted me according to the laws of Dharma; I have, therefore, come to you now; marry me. ஐய்பீனி तனைனன் ஷவாமி நுணனாம் । பின்பைசீய மவர் மூட் யவன்் ஈரை சர்சை: 11 44 11 O best of the kings! I will be your legal wife, for already I used to think you as my husband and you, too, must have thought me your wife."
NEW CORR ENG ──► 40-44. When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhīśma asked the aged Brāhmaṇas, ministers and his mother “What ought to be done now” and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter :-- “O beautiful one! You can go wherever you like.” Thus saying, Bhīśma released her. Then the beautiful daughter of Kāsīrāj went to the house of Sālvarāj and expressed to him her heart’s desire :-- “O great king! Knowing me attached to yourself, Bhīśma has quitted me according to the laws of Dharma; I have therefore come to you now; marry me. O best of the kings! I will be your legal wife, for already I used to think you as my husband and you, too, must have thought me your wife.” 45-47. Śālva replied as follows :-- “O beautiful one! When Bhīśma

[Ch 20 Verse 43-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► śālva replied as follows: “O beautiful one! When Bhīsma caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I won’t marry you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śālva replied as follows :-- “O beautiful one! When Bhīśma caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I won’t marry you.

[Ch 20 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You can say yourself what intelligent man can marry a woman touched by another? Therefore I won't marry you, though Bhīsma has quitted you, in the light of a mother."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You can say yourself what intelligent man can marry a woman touched by another? Therefore I won’t marry you, though Bhīśma has quitted you, in the light of another.”

[Ch 20 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Śālva, the daughter of Kāsīrāja wept bitterly; yet Śālva quitted her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to Bhīsma weeping, and said as follows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words of Śālva, the daughter of Kāsīrāj wept bitterly; yet Śālva quitted her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to Bhīśma weeping, and said as follows :--

[Ch 20 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O great warrior! Śalva did not consent to marry me, as you first took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O Mâhâbhâga! You better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know best what is Dharma. If you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my life.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O great warrior! Śālva did not consent to marry me, as you first took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O Mahābhāga! You better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know best what is Dharma. If you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my life.

[Ch 20 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing her words Bhisma said: "O, beautiful one! How can I accept you, when your mind has become attached towards another. So, O fair one! You better go back soon to your own father with a calm, clear mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing her words Bhīśma said :-- O beautiful one! How can I accept you, when your mind has become attached towards another. So, O fair one! You better go back soon to your own father with a calm, clear mind.

[Ch 20 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Bhima said thus, that daughter of Kāśirāja did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her father's house, but went to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of pilgrimage began to practise asceticism.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Bhīśma said thus, that daughter of Kāsīrāj did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her father’s house, but went to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of pilgrimage began to practise asceticism.

[Ch 20 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now the other two daughters of Kāśīrāja, beautiful and all-auspicious Ambālikā and Ambikā became the wives of king Vicitroavīrya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now the other two daughters of Kāsīrāj, beautiful and all auspicious Ambālikā and Ambikā became the wives of the king Vicītravīrya.

[Ch 20 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the powerful king Vicitroavīrya began to enjoy various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed his time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the powerful king Vicītravīrya began to enjoy various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed his time.

[Ch 20 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For full nine years king Vicitroavīrya enjoyed the sexual pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the jaws of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For full nine years the king Vicītravīrya enjoyed the sexual pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the jaws of death.

[Ch 20 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the death news of her son Victravīrya, Satyavati became very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, performed his funeral obsequies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the death news of her son Vicītravīrya, Satyavatī became very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, performed his funeral obsequies.

[Ch 20 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then she spoke privately to Bhisma with a grievous heart: “O highly fortunate son! now you better govern your father’s kingdom and see that the family of Yayāti does not become excit. So better take your brother’s wife and try your best to continue your family line.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then she spoke privately to Bhīśma with a grievous heart :-- “O highly fortunately son! now you better govern your father’s kingdom and see that the family of Yayāti does not become extinct. So better take your brother’s wife and try your best to continue your family line.

[Ch 20 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhisma then said: “O Mother! Did you not hear of the promise that I already made before my father? So I can not ever marry and govern the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhisma, Satyavati became anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhīśma then said :-- "O Mother! Did you not hear of the promise that I already made before my father? So I cannot ever marry and govern the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhīśma, Satyavatī became anxious.

[Ch 20 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She began to think as follows: “How now the continuity of the family be kept! And it is not advisable to remain idle when the kingdom has become kingless; no happiness can be derived in this state.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She began to think as follows :-- “How now the continuity of the family be kept! And it is not advisable to remain idle when the kingdom has become kingless; no happiness can be derived in this state.”

[Ch 20 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus thinking, she became exceedingly distressed. Then Gaṅgā's son, Bhīṣma spoke to her: "O respected one! Do not worry your mind with cares; now take steps so as to secure a son from Victiravīrya's wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus thinking, she became exceedingly distressed; then the Gaṅgā’s son, Bhīśma spoke to her :-- “O respected one! Do not worry your mind with cares; now take steps so as to secure a son from Vicītravīrya’s wife.

[Ch 20 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Call some best Brāhimn, born of a good family and unite him with Vicitravīrya's wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Call some best Brāhmin, born of a good family and unite him with Vicītravīrya’s wife.

[Ch 20 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus to keep up the family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten the grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands."
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus to keep up the family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten the grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands.”

[Ch 20 Verse 63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these reasonable words of Bhīsma, Satyavati remembered her own son, the sinless Vyāsa Deva, who was born to her during her virginity. As soon as Vyāsa was remembered, the great ascetic and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to his mother.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these reasonable words of Bhīśma, Satyavatī remem bered her own son, the sinless Vyāsa Deva, who was born to her during her virginity. As soon as Vyāsa was remembered, he, the great ascetic and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to his mother.

[Ch 20 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The highly energetic Vyāsa was then worshipped duly by Bhīsma and welcome by Satyavatī and began to rest there like a smokeless fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The highly energetic Vyāsa was then worshipped duly by Bhīśma and welcome by Satyavatī and began to rest there like a smokeless fire.

[Ch 20 Verse 65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mother Satyavatī, then spoke to the chief Muni: “O son! Now procreate a beautiful son from your sperm and the ovum of Vicitravirya’s wife.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mother Satyavatī then spoke to the chief Muni :-- “O son! Now procreate a beautiful son from your sperm and the ovum of Vicītravīrya’s wife.”

[Ch 20 Verse 66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the mother's words, Vyāsa considered them as Veda's injunction and thought they must be obeyed and promised before her that he must obey and and fulfil her orders. He remained there, waiting for the menstruation period.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the mother’s words, Vyāsa considered them as Veda’s injunction and thought they must be obeyed and promised before her that he must obey and and fulfil her orders. He remained there, waiting for the menstruation period.

[Ch 20 Verse 67-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambikā bathed and had a sexual intercourse with Vyāsa and begot a very powerful son, but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of Vyāsa during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavati became exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son's wife: "go soon and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambikā bathed and had a sexual intercourse with Vyāsa and begot a very powerful son, but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of Vyāsa during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavatī became exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son’s wife :-- “Go soon and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner.”

[Ch 20 Verse 69-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the menstruation period arrived, Ambālikā during the night time went to Vyāsa and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was bron; that child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavati thought the new child, too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the year again asked her son's wife Ambālikā to go to Vyāsa. She asked Vyāsa also for the same purpose and sent Ambālika to his bedroom. But Ambālika became afraid, and could not go herself but sent her maid servant for the purpose.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the menstruation period arrived, Ambālikā during the night time went to Vyāsa and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was born; that child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavatī thought the new child, too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the year again asked her son’s wife Ambālikā to go to Vyāsa . She asked Vyāsa also for the same purpose and sent Ambālikā to his bed room. But Ambālikā became afraid, and could not go herself but sent her maid servant for the purpose.

[Ch 20 Verse 72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus from the womb of the maid servant the high souled Vidura was born, having Dharma'a parts and the most auspicious towards all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus from the womb of the maid servant the high souled Vidura was born, having Dharma’s parts and the most auspicious towards all.

[Ch 20 Verse 73-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Vyāsa begot three very powerful sons Dhrtarāstra, Pāndu and Vidura for the continuity of the family line. O sinless Mahrsis! Thus I have described to you my Guru Vyāsa Deva, who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up the continuity of his family and how he begot sons in the womb of his brother Vicitravīrya's wives, according to the laws of Dharma, to keep up a family. Thus ends the Twentieth Chapter of the First Book as well as the First Skandha on Vyāsa doing his duties in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa. ***
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Vyāsa begot three very powerful sons Dhritarāṣṭra, Panḍu and Vidura for the continuity of the family line. O sinless Maharṣis! Thus I have described to you how my Guru Vyāsa Deva, who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up the continuity of his family and how he begot sons in the womb of his brother Vicītravīrya’s wives, according to the laws of Dharma, to keep up a family. Thus ends the twentieth chapter of the 1st Skandha as well as the first Skandha on Vyāsa doing his duties in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa .
