CHAPTER XX

On Vyāsa Doing his Duties

ऋषय कचुः

गुकस्तु परमां सिद्धिमापातवान्देवस्तम ।

किं चकार ततो व्यासस्तजो बृहि सविस्तस्म। ॥ १ ॥

The Rsis said: “O Sūta! What did Veda Vyāsa do, when the highest Yogī Śuka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent supernatural powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

सूत उवाच

शिष्या व्यासस्य वेण्यासन्वेर्ण्यासपरायणा: ।

आज्ञामादाय ते सर्वे गताः पूर्वे महीतले ॥ 2 ॥

असितो देवलछीव वैर्शयायन एव च ।

जैमिनिशु सुमन्तुश गता: सर्वे तपोधानः ॥ 3 ॥

Hearing this question, Sūta spoke: “O Rsis! Vyāsa already had with him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vaiśampāyana, Jaimini, Sumantu and others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas.

तानेतावीक्ष्य पुत्रं च लोकांतरितमयत् ।

व्यास: शोकसमाज्ञान्तो गमनायाक्रोन्यमिति ॥ 4 ॥

सस्मार मतसा व्यासतां निषादसुतां रुषामा ।

मातरं जाइबीतीर मुक्तां शोकसमयित्मानि ॥ 5 ॥

सूत्वा सत्यवर्ती व्यासस्तवक्ता तं पर्वतीतनाम् ।

आजगाम महातेजा जान्मस्थानं स्वकं मुनि: ॥ 6 ॥

After their studies were over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on the earth. Then Vyāsa, seeing that the disciples went to the earth and his son Śuka Deva had gone to the next world, became very much distressed with sorrow and wanted to go to some other place. He then decided to go to his birth place and went to the banks of the Ganges and there remembered his auspicious mother Satyavati, forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and the daughter of a fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain, the source of all happiness and came to his own birth place.

द्वीप प्रायाथ यप्रच्छ वक्त यत सा वरानना ।

नियाब्रत समाच्छुद्रत्या त्राङे तु कन्यका ॥ 7 ॥

Reaching the island where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the beautiful faced, the fisherman's daughter as well the wife of a king. The fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the king Santanu.

दासराजोर्षि सम्पूज्य व्यासं प्रीतिपुरःसरम् ।

स्वागतेनाभिमल्कृत्य प्रोवाच विहितांजसितः ॥ ॥ ॥

Then king of fishermen, seeing Vyāsa there, gladly worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with folded palms, thus:

दासराज उवाच

अष्टा मे सफलं जन्म पार्वितं न कुलं मुने ।

देवानामपि दुर्वेशं यजजतं तत हर्भनम् ॥ 9 ॥

O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare even to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you have purified my family.

यद्यमागतोरसि चं तद्वृष्टि हिज्ञसतम ।

अधि द्वारा धर्म पुत्रान्तद्वारभमिदं विधो ॥ 10 ॥

O Brāhmī! Kindly say what for have you come? My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are at your disposal.

सरस्वत्यासटे रये चकाराधमपटुकण ।

व्यासस्तपःसभायुक्तवैवास सभाहितः ॥ 11 ॥

Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavati, Vyāsa erected an Śārama on the beautiful banks of the river Sarasvatī and remained there in tapasyā with an enlightened mind.

सत्यवस्या: सुत्ती जाती श्रंतनोरमितयुतेः ।

मत्वा ती प्रातरी व्यास: सुखामप चने स्थितः ॥ 12 ॥

Some time elapsed when the highly energetic Śantanu got through his wife Satyavati two sons. Vyāsa Deva considered them as his two brothers and became very glad, though he himself used to live in the forest.

चित्रायगदः प्रवमजी रूपवाख्छतृतापनः ।

बधूव नृपतेः पुत्रः सर्वलक्षणसंयुतः ॥ 13 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XX

विश्वरियर्नामासौ द्वितीयः समाजायत ।

सोर्पि सर्वगुणोपेतेः शंनतः: सुखवर्धिनः ॥ 14 ॥

गांगेय प्रथमस्तस्य महावीरो वलाधिकः ।

तवैव ती सुती जाती सत्यव्यां महावलो ॥ 15 ॥

The first son of king Santanu was Citrāngada, endowed with all auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and tormenting his foes; the second son was Victiravirya; endowed with all qualities. King Śantanu became very happy to get these children. Santanu had one son before through his wife Gaṅgā; he was a great hero and very powerful; and the two sons of Satyavati were equally powerful.

शंनुस्तान्सुतन् वीक्ष्य सर्वेक्षणार्येयुतन् ।

अमस्ताज्यमात्यानं देघादीनां महामानः ॥ १६ ॥

The high souled Śantanu now seeing the three sons, all endowed with all auspicious qualities, began to think that the Devas were incapable to defeat him.

अथ कालेन कियता शंतनुः कालपरयात् ।

तत्वाव तेई धर्मात्मा देही जीर्णमिवंबगम् ॥ 17 ॥

After some time, the religious Śantanu quitted his worn-out body as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time.

कालधर्माने राजि भीमश्रके विधानतः ।

ग्रंकावाणि सर्वाणि दानानि विधधानि च ॥ 18 ॥

After king Śantanu had ascended the heavens, the energetic Bhīsma performed duly his funeral obsequies and gave various things in charity to the Brāhmins.

चित्रांदतं ततो राजे स्वाययामास वीर्यान् ।

स्वयं न कृतान्न राज्यं तस्मादेवताओंपवत् ॥ १९ ॥

He did not accept the kingdom himself; but placed Cittāṅgada on the throne and became known by the name of Devavrata (truthful in vow like the Devas).

चित्रांगदस्तु वीर्थेण प्रमत: परशु:खदः ।

वधूव बलवान् वीर: सत्यव्यतावस: शृष्टि: । २० ॥

The pure souled Cittāngada, born of Satyavati became so much powerful. by sheer force of his

arms, and became so great a hero that the enemies felt endless troubles.

अधैकदा महावाहु: सैन्येन महता वृत: ।

प्रचारा वनोईगान्यप्रथनवयान्याना रूक्त् ॥ 21 ॥

चिग्रांगवतु गन्थवाँ दूर्वहा तं मार्गं नृपम् ।

उत्ततरितिकं भूमैर्विमानवरामाशितः ॥ 22 ॥

Now once on an occasion, the greatly powerful Citrāngada, surrounded by a great army went on a hunting excursion to the forest in quest of rule, deer etc., when the Gandharva Citrāngada seeing the king on the way, alighted from his chariot.

तजाभूच्च महुद्धूदं तयोः सरुषार्थीयोः ।

कुरुक्षेत्रे महास्थाने जीर्ण वर्षणि तापासः ॥ 23 ॥

O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred and wide expanse Kuruksetra between the two heroes, both equally powerful.

इन्द्रतोकमावाण्यु नार्यशेण हतो गो ।

भीष्म: शुत्वा चकाशगृ तस्यीयेदैहिक्त तदा ॥ 24 ॥

गांगेयः कृतशोकस्तु मन्त्रिधिः परिवारितः ।

विधिचत्रवीर्यनामानं राज्येशं च चकार ह ॥ 25 ॥

In the battle, king Citrāngada, the son of Śantanu, was slain by the Gandharva Citrāngada and went up to Heavens. Bhīṣma, born of the womb of Gaṅgā, hearing the above news, expressed his sorrows and, being surrounded by the ministers completed all the funeral obsequies and installed Victiravīrya on the throne.

मन्त्रिभिव्रिंधिता पशुवतुर्भनिश्र महामधिनः ।

स्वपुत्रं राज्यां दूर्वा पुत्रगोकहतासपि च ॥ 26 ॥

सत्यवलसित्नुहा बधून वरवर्धिनी ।

व्यासोपि भारतं श्रुत्वा राजानं मुहितोउभवत् ॥ 27 ॥

Beautiful Satyavati became very much agitated by the death of her son; but when the ministers and the high-souled spiritual teachers consoled her, she become glad when she saw that her youngest son became king. Vyāsa Deva, too, felt himself exceedingly glad to hear that his youngest brother had been made king.

यौविन्दे परम प्राप्तः सत्यव्यतः सुतः शुभः ।

चकार चिन्तां भीभोपेय विद्वाहर्ष कनीयसः ॥ 28 ॥

After some time when the all-auspicious, Satyavati's son Victiravīrya attained his youth, Bhīsma began to think of his marriage.

काशिरासनुतितरतः सर्वल्बणासंपुत् ।

तेन राजा विवाहार्थे स्थापिताश्र स्वयंवरे ॥ 29 ॥

At this time the king of Kási (Kásiñaj) called an assembly Swayamvara (where the kings are invited and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her three daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and the same time.

राजानो राजपुत्राश्र समाहृता: सहसणः ।

इच्छात्वयंवार्यां वे पूज्यमाना: समाप्ताः ॥ 30 ॥

Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from various countries were invited there in the assembly; and, worshipped duly, they went and decorated the hall.

तन श्रीभो महातेजास्ता जहार बलेन वे ।

निर्मल्य राजकं सर्वे रथेनैकेन वीर्यन्ति ॥ 31 ॥

स चित्या पार्थिवान्स्विलोश्रादाय महायः ।

बाहुर्वीर्ण तेजस्वी हासासद गजाछ्यम् ॥ 32 ॥

At that time the highly energetic fiery Bhisma alöne, mounting on his chariot, attacked the infantry and cavalry, and defeated all the kings assembled there, and perforce carried away the three daughters of Kâśirâja and took them to Hanstināpur.

मातृवृद्धिनीवच्छ पुरीवच्छित्यक्ति ।

तिः: समानयामास कन्यका वालोमतोचना : ॥ 33 ॥

सत्यवल्ये निवेशागु हित्रानाछ्य सवलः ।

दैवज्ञावेदिवडुः पर्यपृष्छचृषं दिनम् ॥ 34 ॥

Bhīṣma behaved towards those three daughters as if they were mothers, sisters or daughters and informed Satyavati without any delay of everything that had happened.

कृत्वा विद्वासंभांत तदा चै भातरं निजम् ।

विचित्रविरीर्ध विश्रं विद्वाहस्ति ता यदा ।। 35 ।।

Then he called for the astrologers and Brāhmins, versed in the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage.

तदा ज्येषो3प्यावरेदे कन्यका जाड्वीभुतम् ।

लज्जमानासितायांगी तिसुणां चाक्लोचना ॥ 36 ॥

When the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the religious Bhīsma wanted Victivāriya to marry them. At this time, the eldest daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the Ganga's son Bhīsma:

गंगापुर कुकश्रेष धर्मेत कुत्वरीपक ।

मया स्वयंवरे गाल्वो वृतोरिति मतना नृपः ॥ 37 ॥

"O Gaṅgā's son, the illustrious son of your family and the best of the Kurus! You are the best knower of Dharma; therefore, what more shall I say to you. In the Svayamvara assembly I mentally selected Śālva and it struck me that he, too, looked on me with a very loving heart towards me.

वृताङ़े तेन रात्रा वे चित्ते प्रेमसाङ्गले ।

यथायोग्यं कुरुकषाड़ कुलस्याय परतम् ॥ 38 ॥

तेनाहं वृतपूर्वांसि त्वं च धर्मभृतां वर ।

वलवानसि गाङ्गेय यवेच्छसि तथा कृष्ण ॥ 39 ॥

So, O tormentor of foes? Now do what is fit for that sacred family; O Ganga's son! Not only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are also the foremost of the religious. Śalva mentally wanted to marry me; now do as you like".

सूत उवाच

एवमुक्तस्या तत्र कन्याया कुरुनन्दनः ।

अपुब्छट्बाहाणान्दूबान्मातरं सचिवासंथा ॥ 40 ॥

सर्वेषां मनमात्राय गाज्ञेयो धर्मवितमः।

गच्छेति कन्यकां प्राह यथाकचि वरानने ॥ 41 ॥

विसर्जित्रा सा तेन गता शाल्यानिकेतन ।

उवाच तं वरागेहा राजानं मनसेर्वितम् ॥ 42 ॥

When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhīsma asked the aged Brāmins, ministers and his mother what ought to be done now and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter: "O beautiful one! You can go wherever you like." Thus saying, Bhīsma released her. Then the beautiful daughter of Kāśirāja went to the house of Śāvarāja and expressed to him her heart's desire:

Book 1 Chapter XX

வின்புஞ்சிவ மிஷியை எவனறக்கை தம்மை:

அாளாதியை மஞ்சான் நஞ்சாளங் கர்ம ம 43 11

O great king! Knowing me attached to yourself, Bhisma has quitted me according to the laws of Dharma; I have, therefore, come to you now; marry me.

ஐய்பீனி तனைனன் ஷவாமி நுணனாம் ।

பின்பைசீய மவர் மூட் யவன்் ஈரை சர்சை: 11 44 11

O best of the kings! I will be your legal wife, for already I used to think you as my husband and you, too, must have thought me your wife."

गाल्व उवाच

गृहीता त्वं वराग्रेः श्रीभेण पर्यतो मा ।

रंदे संस्थापिता तेन न ग्रहीघे करं तदा ॥ 45 ॥

śālva replied as follows: “O beautiful one! When Bhīsma caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I won’t marry you.

योर्दिष्ठा च कः कन्यां गृह्माति मतिभावरः ।

अतोहं न ग्रहीयामि त्यक्तां भीभेण मायुत् ॥ 46 ॥

You can say yourself what intelligent man can marry a woman touched by another? Therefore I won't marry you, though Bhīsma has quitted you, in the light of a mother."

रुदती विलपंती सा त्यक्ता तेन महात्मना ।

पुरभिध्मं समात्य रुदती चेदमब्रवीत् ॥ 47 ॥

Hearing these words of Śālva, the daughter of Kāsīrāja wept bitterly; yet Śālva quitted her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to Bhīsma weeping, and said as follows.

शल्यो मुक्ता तथा वीर न गृह्धाति गृह्गण माम् ।

धर्मज्ञोसि महाभाग मरिथ्यायन्यथा हाहम् ॥ 48 ॥

“O great warrior! Śalva did not consent to marry me, as you first took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O Mâhâbhâga! You better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know best what is Dharma. If you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my life.”

भीम उवाच

अन्यक्तिं कां बलं वै गृह्वीय वरवर्णिन ।

चित्तं वं वरागेहे जज शीधे विराकुला ॥ 49 ॥

Hearing her words Bhisma said: "O, beautiful one! How can I accept you, when your mind has become attached towards another. So, O fair one! You better go back soon to your own father with a calm, clear mind.

तयोक्ता सा तु भीक्षेण जागम वनमेव हि ।

तप्यक्रान्त विजने तीर्थं परमपावने ॥ ५० ॥

When Bhima said thus, that daughter of Kāśirāja did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her father's house, but went to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of pilgrimage began to practise asceticism.

इे धार्यं चातिस्पाटके तस्य राज्ञे बध्ववतुः ।

अम्बालिका चाधिक्या च काजिराजसन्ते शुणे ॥ ५ १ ॥

Now the other two daughters of Kāśīrāja, beautiful and all-auspicious Ambālikā and Ambikā became the wives of king Vicitroavīrya.

राज विविचवीर्योंजी ताप्यां सह मुताकलः ।

रेमे नानाविद्यार्थे गृहे चोपवने तथा ॥ 52 ॥

Thus the powerful king Vicitroavīrya began to enjoy various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed his time.

वर्षिण नव राजेत्रः कुर्वैन् कीईां मनोरामा ।

प्राणासी मरणं घ्यो गृहीते राज्यक्ष्मण ॥ 53 ॥

For full nine years king Vicitroavīrya enjoyed the sexual pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the jaws of death.

मृते पुत्रेजितु:खातां जाता सत्यवती तदा ।

कारयामास पुत्रस्य प्रेताक्रविणी मन्त्रिभि: ॥ 54 ॥

Hearing the death news of her son Victravīrya, Satyavati became very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, performed his funeral obsequies.

शीघ्रमाह तदैकान्ते ववनं चातिदुःवित्ता ।

राज्यं कुरु महाभाग विमुते संगन्तोः सुत ॥ 55 ॥

श्रातुभार्यं गृहाण लं वंगे च परिष्रक्ष्य ।

यथा न रागशमायाति ययातैर्शि इत्युत ॥ 56 ॥

Then she spoke privately to Bhisma with a

grievous heart: “O highly fortunate son! now you better govern your father’s kingdom and see that the family of Yayāti does not become excit. So better take your brother’s wife and try your best to continue your family line.”

भीम उवाच

प्रतिज्ञा मे श्रुता मात: पित्रर्षे या मया कृता ।

नाहं राज्यं कतिथ्यामि न चाहं उतरसंग्रहम् ॥ 57 ॥

Bhisma then said: “O Mother! Did you not hear of the promise that I already made before my father? So I can not ever marry and govern the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhisma, Satyavati became anxious.

सूत उवाच

तदा चित्तातुरा जाता कर्थं वंरणो भवेदिति ।

नात्साम्दि सुरं महं सुमुपसे हाराजके ॥ 58 ॥

She began to think as follows: “How now the continuity of the family be kept! And it is not advisable to remain idle when the kingdom has become kingless; no happiness can be derived in this state.

गाङ्गेशस्तापुबाटेचं मा स्थितां कुरु भामिन।

पूरं विविजरीवीर्य क्षेत्रजं चोपपाद्य ।। ५९ ॥।

Thus thinking, she became exceedingly distressed. Then Gaṅgā's son, Bhīṣma spoke to her: "O respected one! Do not worry your mind with cares; now take steps so as to secure a son from Victiravīrya's wife.

कुतीनं द्विजामहुव वध्या सह नियोजय ।

नात्र दोषोर्पतित वेदेपि कुलतर्जाविर्धी कित्ति ॥ ६० ॥

Call some best Brāhimn, born of a good family and unite him with Vicitravīrya's wife.

पीयं चैव सुमत्या राज्यं देिहु गृधित्यितं ।

अहं च पालिय्यामि तस्य ग्रासनमेव हि ॥ 6 1 ॥

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य कानीनं स्वसुतं मुनिन् ।

जगाम मनसा व्यासं द्वीयानमकल्यम् ॥ 6 2 ॥

There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus to keep up the family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten the grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands."

स्मृतमाजस्तो व्यास आजगाम स तापस: ।

कृत्वा प्राणं भाजेश थ संस्थितो दीर्दिमान्मुर्नि: ॥ 63 ॥

Hearing these reasonable words of Bhīsma, Satyavati remembered her own son, the sinless Vyāsa Deva, who was born to her during her virginity. As soon as Vyāsa was remembered, the great ascetic and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to his mother.

भीधेण पूजितः कामं सत्यव्यथा च मानितः ।

तस्थी तत्र महतोज तिथुमो3निनिवार्षपः ॥ 64 ॥

The highly energetic Vyāsa was then worshipped duly by Bhīsma and welcome by Satyavatī and began to rest there like a smokeless fire.

तमुवाच मुनिं माता पुत्रमुयादधानुना ।

क्षेत्र विविचजीरंस्य मुन्द्रं तव वीर्यम् ॥ 65 ॥

The mother Satyavatī, then spoke to the chief Muni: “O son! Now procreate a beautiful son from your sperm and the ovum of Vicitravirya’s wife.”

व्यास: शुत्वा वयं मातुरावलावस्यमन्यत ।

ओमित्युक्त्वा स्थितस्तत्र ऋतुकालमधित्यात् ॥ 66 ॥

Hearing the mother's words, Vyāsa considered them as Veda's injunction and thought they must be obeyed and promised before her that he must obey and and fulfil her orders. He remained there, waiting for the menstruation period.

अधिका च यदा स्नात नारी ऋतुमती तदा ।

संगं प्रायय मुने: पुत्रमुतार्धं महावलम् ॥ 67 ॥

जन्मान्यं च सुतं वीक्ष्य दुर्जिता सत्यवत्यपि ।

ढितीयं च बधूमाह पुत्रमुत्यादयायु वै ॥ 68 ॥

When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambikā bathed and had a sexual intercourse with Vyāsa and begot a very powerful son, but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of Vyāsa during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavati became exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son's wife: "go soon and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner."

अन्तुकातेक्षे अमुपाने व्यासेन सह सरिता ।

तथा चांबालिका राजौ गर्भ नारी द्वारा सा ॥ 69 ॥

Book 1 Chapter XX

सोर्पि पोड़ुः सुतो जातो राज्ययोग्यो न समतः ।

पूजार्थे प्रियामास वर्षान्ने च पुनर्वधून् ॥ ७० ॥

आहूय च ततो व्यासं संप्राध्यं मुनिसत्तमम् ।

प्रियामास राते सा शवनागारनुचनम् ॥ ७१ ॥

When the menstruation period arrived, Ambālikā during the night time went to Vyāsa and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was bron; that child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavati thought the new child, too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the year again asked her son's wife Ambālikā to go to Vyāsa. She asked Vyāsa also for the same purpose and sent Ambālika to his bedroom. But Ambālika became afraid, and could not go herself but sent her maid servant for the purpose.

न तात च घधूस्तन प्रेधा संप्रेधित तथा ।

तस्यां च विदुरो जातो दास्यां धर्मश्रतः शुभ: ॥ 7 2 ॥

Thus from the womb of the maid servant the high souled Vidura was born, having Dharma'a parts and the most auspicious towards all.

एवं व्यासेन ते पुत्रा धृतराष्ट्रदयख्वः ।

उत्पादिता महावीरा वोशरक्षणतेईसे ॥ 7 3 ॥

एतद्धः रवंमाख्यातं तत्थ वेशसमुद्धवम् ।

व्यासेन रश्रित्ते वंशो भातृधर्मविद्धरान्वतः ॥ 7 4 ॥

डीत श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणोउद्धरसासाहक्वां सहितायां

प्रथमस्कन्चे विशोज्याय: ॥ 75 ॥

वेदादौडूक्षितिमितै: ( 1 1 8 4 ) सार्थै: रश्नोकै: सवितस्तम् ।

देवीभागवतस्यां प्रथमस्कन्य उंग्रितः ॥ 76 ॥

समाप्तोउं प्रथम: स्कन्धः ॥ 77 ॥

Thus Vyāsa begot three very powerful sons Dhrtarāstra, Pāndu and Vidura for the continuity of the family line. O sinless Mahrsis! Thus I have described to you my Guru Vyāsa Deva, who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up the continuity of his family and how he begot sons in the womb of his brother Vicitravīrya's wives, according to the laws of Dharma, to keep up a family.

Thus ends the Twentieth Chapter of the First Book as well as the First Skandha on Vyāsa doing his duties in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

***