CHAPTER XI

On the three Kinds of Bhasma

नारद खाच

विविध्यां कवं चाय सभमनः परिकीर्तितम् ।

पुलत्कथय मे देव महल्मौतुरं मम ॥ १ ॥

Nārāda asked: O Bhagavan! How is the above Bhasma of three kinds? I am eager to hear this. Kindly describe this to me."

श्रीनारायण उवाच

निविधाचं प्रवक्ष्यामि देवपं भयस्नः श्रणु ।

महापापक्षयकं महाकीर्कितं परम् ॥ 2 ॥

गोमयं योगनसंबंदं तद्धस्तेनैव गृहतं ।

बाहीभरितु संदर्धं तच्छांतिकृदीहोच्छते ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: “O Nārada! I am now talking of the three kinds of ashes; hearing this even destroys one’s sins and brings in good fame. When a cow evacuates her dung, just as the cow dung leaves her and is far from reaching the ground, one should catch it with one’s hand and this cowdung burnt with “Sadyojātādi i.e., Brahma Mantra” becomes ashes which are called “Sāntika Bhasma,” i.e., ashes producing peace.

सावधानस्तु गृहीयात्रजो के नोगमं तु यत् ।

अंतरिक्रे गृहीत्वा ततखंत्रेन रेदेदत: ॥ 4 ॥

पौथिकं तत्समाख्यातं कामदं च ततः श्रुण ।

प्रसादेन ददेदेतत्कामदं भयम् क्रौतितम् ॥ 5 ॥

Before the cowdung is about to reach the ground, the devotee should take it with his hand and uttering

the six lettered Mantra, he is to burn the cowdung. The ashes from this are called Paustik Bhasma, i.e., ashes leading to nourishment.

If the cowdung be burned with the Mantra "Haum," the ashes of this are called "Kāmada Bhasma i.e., ashes leading to the granting of desires.

प्रातस्थाय देवर्षे भयम्ब्रतपर: शृषि: ।

गवां गोष्टिशु गत्वा तु नमस्कृत्वा तु गोकुलम् ॥ 6 ॥

गवां वर्णानुकरणाणां गृहीयादगोमयं शुभम् ।

बाहाप्यस्य च गो: श्वेता तत्ता गौ: क्षयिसया च ॥ 7 ॥

O Nārada! On the full moon day, new moon day or on the eighth lunar day a man is to get up from his hed early in the morning and be pure and go the cow enclosure. He is to salute the cows and take the cowdung, uttering the Mantra Haum.

पीतवाणां तु वैश्यस्य कृष्णा गुरूस्य कव्यते ।

पौर्णमात्यमावास्यामध्यां वा विसुब्द्रधीः ॥ 8 ॥

प्रसादेन तु मंत्रेण गृहीत्वा गोपायं शुभम् ।

इद्येन तु मंत्रेण पिंवीकृतव तु गोपायम् ॥ 9 ॥

If he be a Brāhmīn, he is to collect the white cow dung; if he be a Kṣattriya, he would take the red cow dung; a Vaiśya, yellow cowdung and if he be a Śidra, he would take the black cowdung.

रविरिषमुस्तंत शुची देहे मनोहरे ।

तुषेण वा बुरैवर्णि प्रासादे न तु निश्विषेण् ॥ 10 ॥

Book XI Chapter XI

अरप्युद्वमर्नि वा श्रोत्रियागारं तु वा ।

तदनौं निय्यसेनेचे च शिवक्रीजेन मंत्रतः ॥ १ १ ॥

Then by the mantra “Namah” he is to form that into a ball and cover it with the husk of rice or some other grain and dry it in a sacred place, repeating the mantra “Haum”. Bring fire from a forest or from the house of a Veda-knowing Brāhmin and reduce the cowdung to ashes by this mantra, uttering the mantra Haum.

गृहीयाद्व त्वानिमकुपाढ़म्स विचक्षणः ।

नवपार्चं समादाय प्रसादेन तु निशिषेपे ॥ १२ ॥

केतकी पाटली तद्वरुगरीं चंदनं तथा ।

नानासुर्गीधिर्य्याणि कार्यमीरप्रभृतीनि च ॥ १३ ॥

निशिष्तत्र पाते तु सहोमंगेय शुद्धरीः ।

जल्लनां पुरा कृत्वा भस्मस्नानमतः परम् ॥ 14 ॥

Next take out the ashes carefully from the fire place (Agni Kūndā) and place it in a new jar or pot, again remembering the mantra “Haum”. Mix with the ashes the Ketaki dust, the Pāṭala flower dust, the root of the fragrant grass called khas khas, saffron and other sweet scented things with the mantra “Sadyojātam prapadyāmi,” etc.

जल्माने त्वगत्कषच घमस्मानां समाचरेत् ।

प्रशल्पा पादौ हस्ती च शिरक्षेशानमंत्रतः ॥ 15 ॥

समुद्वल ततः पश्चाम्पुतं ततुषणेण तु ।

अयोरणे तु हदयं नाथि वामेन तत्परम् ॥ 16 ॥

First perform the water bath, then the bath of the ashes. In case one cannot have the water bath, one is to have the ash bath. Washing the hands, feet and head with the mantra “Iśānah Sarvavidyānām,” etc., and uttering “Tatpuruṣa” one is to besmear one’s face with ashes and by the mantra “Aghora” apply ashes on one’s chest; with the mantra Vāmadeva.”

सहोमेगेन सर्वाईं समुद्धूल विचक्षण: ।।

पूर्ववर्षे परित्यज्य शुद्ध्वरर्थे परिप्रहते् ।। 17 ॥

प्रशाल्य पादौ हस्ती च पश्चादाचमं नेरत् ।

घस्मनोद्धुलनायावे त्रिपुणई तु विक्रीयते ॥ 18 ॥

He is to use ashes on his navel; and with the mantra “Sadyo Játa, etc.,” all over his body; he is

to quit his former cloth and put on another fresh cloth. Wash your hands and feet and sip (do Ācamana). It will serve the purpose if one simply uses Tripundrak and if one does not besmear the whole body with ashes.

मध्याहाग्रामलैयुक्ति पततो जलवर्जितम् ।

तर्ज-न्यानामिकामर्थेक्रिपुर्णु च समाचरेत् ॥ 19 ॥

मूर्टि चेव ललटे च कर्णं कंठे तथैव च ।

द्वदेय चैव वाढ़ोश् न्यासस्यानं हि चोच्छते ॥ 20 ॥

Before the midday one is to use Bhasma with water; but after the midday with dry ashes one is to draw the Tripunāra lines of ashes with the forefinger, middelfinger and ringfinger. The head, forehead, ears, neck, heart, and the arms are the places whereon the Tripundras are used.

पंचागृत्यैन्यैम्पूर्ति प्रसादेन तु मंत्रतः ।

त्रयुर्लिंद्यमेवेद्राल्ले शिगोमेजेन देशिकाः ॥ 21 ॥

सहोन दक्षिणे कर्णे वामदेवेन वामतः ।

अप्रौणेन तु कपठे च मधाङ्गूला सुगोद्गादुम् ॥ 22 ॥

हद्यं हद्येनैव जिभिरंगुलिधि: सूगेत् ।

विज्यसहैक्षणे बाही शिखामंगेन दैरिकाः ॥ 23 ॥

बामबाहीं यन्सेद्वीमान्कवचेन त्रिवर्भुलेः ॥ 24 ॥

मध्येन संरुष्ठीजाध्यामीगान इति मन्त्रः ॥ 24 ॥

On the head, the ashes are applied with five fingers and with the mantra “Haum”; on the forehead, the Tripundra is applied with mantra Svāhā by the forefinger, middlefinger and ringfinger; on the right ear, it is applied with “Sadyojāta” mantra; on the left ear, with “Vamadeva” Mantra; on the neck with Aghora mantra by the middlefinger; on the chest with “Namah” mantra by the forefinger, middlefinger and ringfinger; on the right arm with vaṣat mantra by the three fingers; on the left arm with “Hum” mantra by the three fingers; and on the navel, the ashes are to be applied with the mantra Iśānah sarva devānām by the middlefinger.

ब्रह्मविष्णुमहेशानास्तिस्रो रेखा इति स्मृताः ।
आद्यो ब्रह्मा ततो विष्णुस्तदूर्ध्वं तु महेश्वरः ॥ २५॥

एकाङ्गुलेन न्यस्तं यदीश्वरस्तत्र देवता ।
शिरोमध्ये त्वयं ब्रह्मा ईश्वरस्तु ललाटके ॥ २६॥

कर्णयोरश्विनौ देवौ गणेशस्तु गले तथा ।
क्षत्रियश्च तथा वैश्यः शूद्रश्चोद्धूलनं त्यजेत् ॥ २७॥

सर्वेषामन्त्यजातीनां मन्त्रेण रहितं भवेत् ।
(अदीक्षितं मनुष्याणामपि मन्त्रं विना भवेत्)॥ २८॥

इति श्रीमद्देवीभागवते महापुराणेऽष्टादशसाहस्र्यां
संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे
त्रिविधभस्ममाहात्म्यवर्णनं नामकादशोऽध्यायः ॥ ११.११॥

The first line in every Tripundra is Brahmā; the second line is Viṣṇu; and the third, the topmost line is Mahā Deva. The line of ashes that is marked by one finger is Íśvara. The head is the place of Brahmā; the forehead is the site of Íśvara; the two

ears are the seats of the two Aśvins and the neck is where Gancśa resides. The Kṣattiryas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras are to use Tripundras without any mantra; they are also not to use the ashes on the whole of the body. The lowest classes (e.g. the cāndālas, etc.) and the uninitiated persons are to use the Tripundrakhs without any mantra.

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book

on the description of the greatness of the three

kinds of Bhasmas in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevīthagavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

