CHAPTER XXIV

On Vikṣepa Śakti

राजोवाच

भार्वेरस्न्युखीभोजाध्छृते दिव्यक्रायरास्म ।

न तृत्यिमीयाच्छाम विश्वस्नु सुधया सम्म ॥ १ ॥

The King Janamejaya said: O Bhagavān! I am not satiated with the drink of the divine sweet nectar-like words coming out of your lotus mouth. विश्वसिमदायाखनं कथितं भवता मम् ।

हैहयानां समुपतिन्सितात्रम्यमप्रदा ॥ २ ॥

You have described to me in detail the wonderful and variegated story of the origin of the Haihaya dynasty; but, O Muni! There has arisen in my mind a curiosity to know something more on this subject.

परं कौतुहलं मेउत्र यदिषुणुः कमलापति: ।

देवदेवो जगाधावः सुहित्स्थ्यंतकाकाः ॥ ३ ॥

सोउपवर्षभावामपत्रो भगवाह्नरित्यन्तुः ।

परतनः कर्थ जातः स्वतनः पुरुषोतमः ॥ ४ ॥

See the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the Ruler of this whole Universe and the Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction; yet that Best of Puruṣas Śrī Bhagavān had to assume a horse form. He is undecaying and independent, how then He came to be dependent?

एतन्ने संशयं बह्यउ्छेतुभहींस संग्रितम् ।

सर्वज्ञस्वं मुनिश्रेष्ठ बृहि वृत्तानमढुतम् ॥ 5 ॥

Clear this doubt of mine. O Best of Munis! You are omniscient; therefore satisfy my curiosity by describing this wonderful event.

व्यास उवाच

शृणु राजन्यवक्ष्यामि संदेश्यास्य निर्णयम् ।

तथा श्रुतं मया पूर्वं नारदामुनिसतमात् ॥ 6 ॥

बहाणो मानसः पुत्रो नारदो नाम तापसः ।

सर्वैत्रः सर्वेगः शान्तः सर्वैताकप्रियः क्रकिः ॥ 7 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hear what I heard of yore from Nārada how this doubt was removed. The mind born son of Brahmā, Maharṣi Nārada got powers to go everywhere by virtue of his Tapas, could know everything, was of a calm and quiet nature, dear to all and he was a poet.

स चैकदा मुनिश्रेष्ठी विचरन्युधिवीमिमम् ।

वाद्यन्महर्ती वीर्णां स्वरातनसम्यित्नम् ॥ 8 ॥

ब्रह्धधतरात्रीना सामानं घेदाननेकाः ।

गायनायश्रममुत संग्रातोउध मामाश्रमम् ॥ 9 ॥

On one occasion he went out on tour round the world, playing with his lute in time with Svara and Tāna. One day he came to my Āśrama, singing many things concerning Brhat Rathantara Sāma Veda and the sweet nectar-like Gāyatrī, the Giver of Liberation.

Book VI Chapter XXIV

शयाप्रासं महातीर्थं सरस्वल्या: सुपावनम् ।

निवासं मुनिमुख्यानां शर्मदं ज्ञानं तवा ॥ 10 ॥

O King! There was a very sacred place of hermitage, beaming as it were with happiness and self-knowledge, named Śamyāprāsa, on the banks of the river Sarasvatī. There was situated my hermitage.

तमागतमहं प्रेश्य बढ़ापुरं महावृतिम् ।

अध्य्यात्यार्दिकं सर्व कृत्वावन्चैराविकम् ॥ ११ ॥

Seeing the lustrous Nārada Rṣi, the son of the Grand Sire Brahmā, coming, I get up and offered him duly Pāḍya (water to wash his feet) and Argha (offerings of worship), etc., and worshipped him.

अध्य्याएविधि कृत्वा तस्यानन्थितस्य च ।

उपविष्ट: समीपेड़ं मुनेनरमितजेस: ॥ 12 ॥

दूष्वा विश्विमगं शान्ते नारतं ज्ञानपादम् ।

तमपुरुषहं राजन्यरुहोड़ं त्वायेघून ॥ 13 ॥

When that Muni of indomitable lustre took his seat on the Asana, I sat beside him. When I found Nārada, the Giver of Knowledge, at rest and quiet, I duly asked him the very same question that you have asked me just now.

असारेर्स्सितु संसारे प्राणिनां किं सुखं पुने ।

न पश्यामि विनिश्रित्य कदाचित्वकुचित्वस्थिति ॥ १४ ॥

O Best of Munis! What happiness is there on the beings taking their birth in this world. I never found it in any place or in any concern, this I can say positively.

ड्री पे जातो जनन्याहं संत्यक्तस्तक्षणादपि ।

अनाङ्गयो वने वृद्धि प्रापतः कर्मपुसारतः ॥ १५ ॥

Still why do the high minded persons do Karma, fascinated by the enchantments of the world. Look! I was born in an island.

तपस्तपं मया घोरां पवैते बहुवार्षिकम् ।

पुसकामेन देवर्षं शड़रः सपुपासितः ॥ १६ ॥

Just after my birth, my mother forsook me. Helpless, I grew in the forest as my Karma allowed. Next I performed a very severe tapasyā before Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas, on the mountain with a dosire to have a son.

ततो मया शुक्र: प्राप्त: पुत्रे ज्ञानवतं चर: ।

पाठितसून मया सम्यवेदात्मां सार आदितः ॥ १ ७ ॥

As a fruit of that I got Suka as my son, the foremost of the Gnostics, and taught him completely the essence of the Vedas from the beginning to the end.

स त्यकता में गतः: क्वाथि मृन्ति विरहातुम् ।

लोकाल्लोकानांर साधो वचनातव जोधितः ॥ 18 ॥

O Devarsī! When my son got wisdom from you, he left this world even when I became very distressed on his bereavement and wept aloud and he went away to the next world.

ततोड़े नुवस्नतल्यवबा मेरे महापितिभि ।

मातरं मनसा कृत्वा संग्राम: कृकर्जानम् ॥ 19 ॥

पुत्रस्नेहादिततरां कृशांग: शोकसंयुतः ।

जाननिष्येति संसारं मायावागनियन्त्रितः ॥ 20 ॥

Very much afflicted for the parting of my son, I abandoned the great Mountain Meru. I got very lean due to the absence of my dear son whom I loved very much; and becoming very distressed and knowing this whole world to be an illusion, remembered my mother and went to the Kuru Jāṅgala district, as if bound up and controlled by the snares of Māyā.

तत्तो राजा वृतां जात्वा मातरं वासवीं शुभाम् ।

स्थितोउत्रैवाक्षमं कृत्वा सरस्वल्याप्रातटे शुभे ॥ 21 ॥

When I heard that the King Śāntanu had married my mother, I built my hermitage on the holy banks of the Sarasvati and remained there.

गैतनुः स्वर्गितं प्राणते विपुरा जननी स्थिता ।

पुर्वदययुत साखी धीभेण प्रतिपातिता ॥ 22 ॥

When the King Śāntanu went to the next world, my chaste mother remained with two sons. At that time Bhīṣma looked after their sustenance and maintained them.

चित्रांगदः कृती राजा गंगापुरेण धीमता ।

कालेन सोःपि मे प्राता मृतः कामसम्बृति: ॥ 23 ॥

The intelligent Ganga's son Bhīsma Deva installed Cītrāngāda on the throne. A short while after this, Cītrāngada, too, looking like a second

Cupid and extremely lovely, went to the jaws of death.

ततः सत्यवती माता निममना शोकासागर ।

चित्रानंद मृतं पुत्रं रूतेद भृशमातृना ॥ 24 ॥

The mother Satyavatī was drowned in the sorrows for his son Cittāṅgada and began to weep for him.

संग्राटोड़ महाभाग्र जातव तां दुःखितां सतीम् ।

आश्रासिता मायात्यर्षी भीभेण च महात्मना ॥ 25 ॥

विश्वसीर्यल्पणे वीर्वीवान्यधिवीपितः ।

कृतो भीभेण भाता वे क्षीराज्यविपुढ़न ॥ 26 ॥

O King! Knowing my mother in that sorrowful condition, I went to her. Bhīṣma and I then consoled her with hopeful words. Bhīṣma Deva was averse to marrying and then becoming a King; and, therefore, he installed again the younger brother, the powerful Victiravirya on the throne.

कारिज्ञानसुत रये विनियन पृथिव्योपतीन ।

भीम्पोनापीय स्वबलात्कन्यके इे समर्पिते ॥ २७ ॥

O King! Bhīṣma defeated by his own prowess the kings and brought the two daughters of the Kings Kāśtrāja and handed them over to Satyavati, so that she might give them over to Victiravīrya.

सत्यवर्यै रुषे काते विवाहः परिक्षित्रणः ।

श्रातूर्षित्वत्रीयस्य तताईं सुक्षितो3प्रभम् ॥ 28 ॥

Then, on an auspicious day, and in an auspicious Lagna (moment) when the marriage ceremony of my brother Victiravriya was performed, I became glad.

पुनः सोर्पि मुते प्राता यक्षणा पीक्षितो घृषणम् ।

अनपलो युवा धन्वी माता मे दुःखिताउभवत् ॥ 29 ॥

My brother, a good archer, was shortly afterwards attacked with consumption and thus he died without any issue.

कारीशरावसुरु वे तु मृतं इयूधा परित तदा ।

पतिन्तमाधमपैरे भागीयो संबंचपूवत्: ॥ 30 ॥

ते ऋचतुः सर्ती श्रशूं रुद्तीं भुणुः:खिताम् ।

पतिना सहगामित्यी भविष्यावो हुतागरे ॥ 31 ॥

पूत्रेण सह ते श्रशू स्वर्गे गतालअल नन्दने ।

सुखेन विहीएयावः पतिना सह संयुते ॥ 32 ॥

At this my mother became very sad and dejected. Seeing the husband dead, the two daughters of Kāsirāja became ready to preserve their religion of chastity and said to their mother-in-law, sorrowful and weeping: "We two shall accompany our husband and become Satī (i.e., burnt up with our husbands). O Devi! We will go to the Heaven with your son.

निवारिते तदा माता व्यक्षी तस्मानमहोद्यान् ।

स्नेहभावं समाश्रित्य भीभवस्य वचनात्ता ॥ 33 ॥

गांगेशेन च माता गे संमंत्र्य च परस्पत् ।

कृत्यीधर्वैहिक सर्व सैम्युतेई नगताछ्चे ॥ 34 ॥

We, the two sisters united, will enjoy with him in the Nandana Garden. The mother was very much attached to them and with the permission of Bhisma Deva, very affectionately made them desist from this great attempt.

स्मृतमास्त्रु मात्रा वै नात्वा भार्यं मनोगतम् ।

तत्सेवागतश्रहं नगरं नागसाढूमम् ॥ 35 ॥

When all the funeral obsequies of Victiravīrya were over, my mother consulted with Bhīsma and remembered me in Hastināangara.

प्रणाय्य मातर्ग मुन्नीं संश्वितोदय कृताङ्जसि: ।

तामबूदं सुतलांगी पूत्रगोकेन कर्जितगम् ॥ 36 ॥

मातत्स्वया किमाहुतो मनसाउं तपस्थिति ।

आजापय महत्वायं दासोर्पिम कवाणीय किम ॥ 37 ॥

As soon as she remembered me, immediately I knew her mental feelings and hurriedly came to Hastināṅagara and, with my head bowed, fell prostrate before her feet, and with folded hands addressed my mother who was very much inflamed with the fire of sorrow for the death of her son, thus: O Mother! Why have you called me here mentally? I see you are very much dejected; I am your servant; order me what I can do for you.

तब मे तीर्थे परं मातदेवघ प्रधित: परः ।

आगताश्रितितश्रात्र वृक्ति कृत्यं तव प्रियम् ॥ 38 ॥

O Mother! You are my greatest place of pilgrimage and you are my highest deity; I am very anxious since I have come here; say that what you desire.

Book VI Chapter XXIV

यास उवाच

इत्युक्स्वाहं स्थितस्तत मातुर्ये यदा मुने ।

तदा सा मामुवार्वेदे एप्यन्ती भीष्ममत्के ॥ 39 ॥

पुत्र तेउष घृतो घाता पीडित्ता राज्यक्षणा ।

तेनाहं दु:स्तिता जाता वंशच्छेदभ्यादित् ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O Best of Munis! When I said thus and waited before her, then she looked at Bhisma standing close by and said: “O Child! Your brother died of consumption; therefore I am very sorrowful, lest the family becomes extinct.”

तस्मावचघ मेधावियमातृतः स्माधिन ।

गांगेययय मतेनात्र गाराश्यर्धीसिद्धे ॥ 41 ॥

O Intelligent One! For the continuance of the line, then, with the permission of the Ganga's son, I have called you here today by the Samādhi Yoga. कुर्व स्थापय नहं तं शनतोनीभकारणात् ।

स्म मं दुःखतः कृष्ण यंशछेदोद्ध्वादुद्रतुम् ॥ 42 ॥

O son of Parāśara! you re-establish the name of Śāntanu that is going now to be well nigh extinct.

काशिराजसुते धार्ये धातुस्तव यदीयसः ।

साधोर्विश्वशिर्यसि रूपशैवनभूषिति ॥ 43 ॥

O Vyāsa Deva! Relieve me soon from this sorrow of mine, lest this line be extinct. There are the two daughters of Kāśirāja, honest and good and endowed with youth and beauty.

ताध्यां संगम्य मेधाविन्युजीर्यादनकं कुक ।

तब तंब भारतं वर्णन तारयेघोर्जित कहिंचित् ॥ 44 ॥

O Highly Intelligent One! Better you cohabit with them and save the family of Bharata by begetting sons. You will not be touched with any sin.

व्यास उवाच

इति मातुर्विः: श्रुत्वा जाताश्रितानुते हाहम्।

लज्जाया३कुलचितस्तावम्बूवं चिन्याततः ॥ 4 5 ॥

मात: पापात्रिकं कर्म परादतारमिश्मनम् ।

ज्ञाला धार्मियं सम्यककारीम कक्षमादगत् ॥ 46 ॥

तथा ययीयसो प्राणवर्णु: कन्या प्रक्रक्रितिता ।

व्यधिचारं कंकं कुयामधीत्य निर्मानान्हम् ॥ 47 ॥

Vyāsa said: O Devarṣi! Hearing the mother's

words, I became very anxious and humbly told her with great shame: "O Mother! To touch another's wife is a very sinful act; knowing well the path of Dharma, how can I willingly and intentionally violate that?

अन्यायेन न कतैन्वं सर्वेथा कुलतर्शणम् ।

न तरतिन हि संसारातिवस्तः पापाकारिणः ॥ 48 ॥

So also, the Maharsis say: That the wife of a younger brother is like a daughter. Studying all the Vedas, how can I do this blame-worthy and adulterous act?

लेकानामुपदेष्टा यः पुराणानां प्रवर्तैकः ।

स कर्ष कृत्तिसं कर्म मूला कुर्णम्हाद्धून ॥ 49 ॥

पुनरुक्तो हाहं मात्रा कट्टवा भृग्यान्तिके ।

पुत्रशोकांतिततपाया वैराश्रणकाकायया ॥ 50 ॥

To preserve a line of family by illegal ways is never to be done; for then the fathers of the sinners can never cross this ocean of world. How can he, who is the spiritual preceptor of all, and the writer of all the Purāṇas, do this act knowingly which is awfully strange and very bad and nasty in its nature.

पारास्थरं न ते दोशो वचनान्मय पुत्रक ।

गुरुणां वचनं तथ्यं सदोषमपि मानवः ॥ 51 ॥

My mother was very much plunged into the sea of sorrows for the breavement of her son; so to preserve the family, She came again to me, weeping and said: "O son of Parāśara! If you follow my words, you wo'nnt incur any sin.

कर्तेब्यमविचार्यैंव शिष्टाचारप्रमाणतः ।

वचनं कुक मे पुत्र न ते दोषोजित मानच ॥ 52 ॥

O Child! If the reasonable words of the Gurus be even faulty, one should obey them according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Therefore, O Child! Keep my word and preserve my honour; no sin will touch you.

पुत्रस्य जनने कृत्वा सुखितीं कुक माताम् ।

विशेषेण तु संततां मन्त्रं शोक्षाणघे सुते ॥ 53 ॥

O Child! Think very well. Your mother is very sorry and is immersed in the ocean of afflictions; therefore it is your paramount duty to make her

happy by begetting child for the continuance of the family."

इति तां द्ववर्ती शुचा तदा सुरवर्तीसुतः ।

मामुवाच विशेषेच: सूक्ष्यधर्म्य सिपर्ये ॥ 54 ॥

द्वीपायन विचारोउन न कत्व्यस्त्वयानउन ।

मातुर्वंचनमादाय विहरस्य यथासुखम् ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing my mother speaking to me thus, Bhisma, the Ganga's son, the expert in finding out truth in fine points with regard to Dharma, said to me: "O Dvaipāyana! You are wholly sinless; you ought not therefore to argue on this point; obey your mother as she says and be happy."

व्यास उवाच

इति तत्य वचः शुत्वा मातुश प्रार्थनं तथा ।

नि:शंकोई तत जातः कार्यं तस्मिक्युपियिति ॥ 56 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing his words and my mother's request, I decided to do this very hateful act with a fearless heart without any suspicious.

अधिकवायां प्रवृतो3हयुत्मत्वां मुदा निशि ।

परिव विमनसायां तु तापसे कृत्तिसे घूर्णम् ॥ 57 ॥

ग्राला मया सा सुक्षोणी प्रसंगे प्रथमे तथा ।

संश्रसे भविता पुत्रे यतते नेत्रे निर्मितले ॥ 58 ॥

When Ambikā finished her ablutions after menstruation, I gladly cohabited with her in the

night; but that young lady seeing my ugly ascetic form, was not attachment to me; I then cursed that beautiful woman thus: "As you closed your eyes at the first cohabitation with me, your son will be born blind."

हितीये है मुनिश्रेष्ठ पुर्यो मात्रा रह: पुनः ।

भविष्यति सुतः पुःः काशिरासुस्तोदे ॥ ५९ ॥

मयोक्ता जननी तत श्रीदायमपुंल वह ।

विनेजो भविता पुत्रो मातः शापान्मेव है ॥ 60 ॥

O Muni! On the second day my mother enquired me when I was alone: "O Dvaipāyana! Will there be born a son of the daughter of Kāśrāja? I then bowed my head with shame, and told "Mother! The son will be born blind, through my curse."

तया निर्भीत्सतरन कठोरवचसा मुने ।

कर्थ पुत्र त्वया ग्रपः पुत्रसेउयो भविष्यति ॥ 61 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे श्वरक्ये

वर्गविंशोअष्ण: 11 24 11

O Muni! The mother then rebuked me harshly "O Child! Why did you curse that the son of Ambikā would be born blind?"

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the description of Vikṣepa Śakti in the

discourse between Vyāsa and Nārada in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

