[Ch 24 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have described to me in detail the wonderful and variegated story of the origin of the Haihaya dynasty; but, O Muni! There has arisen in my mind a curiosity to know something more on this subject.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have described to me in detail the wonderful and variegated story of the origin of the Haihaya dynasty; but, O Muni! There has arisen in my mind a curiosity to know something more on this subject.

[Ch 24 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► See the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the Ruler of this whole Universe and the Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction; yet that Best of Puruṣas Śrī Bhagavān had to assume a horse form. He is undecaying and independent, how then He came to be dependent?
NEW CORR ENG ──► See the Bhagavān Viṣṇu, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Deva of the Devas, the Ruler of this whole Universe and the Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction; yet that Best of Puruṣas Śrī Bhagavān had to assume a horse form. He is undecaying and independent, how then He came to be dependent?

[Ch 24 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Clear this doubt of mine. O Best of Munis! You are omniscient; therefore satisfy my curiosity by describing this wonderful event.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Clear this doubt of mine. O Best of Munis! You are omniscient; therefore satisfy my curiosity by describing this wonderful event.”

[Ch 24 Verse 6-7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hear what I heard of yore from Nārada how this doubt was removed. The mind born son of Brahmā, Maharṣi Nārada got powers to go everywhere by virtue of his Tapas, could know everything, was of a calm and quiet nature, dear to all and he was a poet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hear what I heard of yore from Nārada how this doubt was removed. The mind-born son of Brahmā, Maharṣi Nārada got powers to go everywhere by virtue of his Tapas, could know everything, was of a calm and quiet nature, dear to all and he was a poet.

[Ch 24 Verse 8-9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On one occasion he went out on tour round the world, playing with his lute in time with Svara and Tāna. One day he came to my Āśrama, singing many things concerning Brhat Rathantara Sāma Veda and the sweet nectar-like Gāyatrī, the Giver of Liberation.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On one occasion he went out on tour round the world, playing with his lute in time with Svar and Tān. One day he came to my Āśrama, singing many things concerning Brihat Rathantara Sāma Veda and the sweet nectar-like Gāyatrī, the Giver of Liberation.

[Ch 24 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There was a very sacred place of hermitage, beaming as it were with happiness and self-knowledge, named Śamyāprāsa, on the banks of the river Sarasvatī. There was situated my hermitage.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There was a very sacred place of hermitage, beaming as it were with happiness and self-knowledge, named Śamyāprāsa, on the banks of the river Sarasvatī. There was situated my hermitage.

[Ch 24 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing the lustrous Nārada Rṣi, the son of the Grand Sire Brahmā, coming, I get up and offered him duly Pāḍya (water to wash his feet) and Argha (offerings of worship), etc., and worshipped him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing the lustrous Nārada the son of the Grand Sire Brahmā, coming, I got up and offered him duly Pādya (water to wash his feet) and Argha (offerings of worship), etc., and worshipped him.

[Ch 24 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When that Muni of indomitable lustre took his seat on the Asana, I sat beside him. When I found Nārada, the Giver of Knowledge, at rest and quiet, I duly asked him the very same question that you have asked me just now.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When that Muni of indomitable lustre took his seat on the Āsana, I sat beside him. When I found Nārada, the Giver of Knowledge, at rest and quiet, I duly asked him the very same question that you have asked me just now.

[Ch 24 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! What happiness is there on the beings taking their birth in this world. I never found it in any place or in any concern, this I can say positively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Best of Munis! What happiness is there on the beings taking their birth in this world. I never found it in any place or in any concern, this I can say positively.

[Ch 24 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Still why do the high minded persons do Karma, fascinated by the enchantments of the world. Look! I was born in an island.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Still why do the high minded persons do Karma, fascinated by the enchantments of the world. Look! I was born in an island.

[Ch 24 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Just after my birth, my mother forsook me. Helpless, I grew in the forest as my Karma allowed. Next I performed a very severe tapasyā before Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas, on the mountain with a dosire to have a son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Just after my birth, my mother forsook me. Helpless, I grew in the forest as my Karma allowed. Next I performed a very severe tapasyā before Mahādeva, the Deva of the Devas, on the mountain with a desire to have a son.

[Ch 24 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As a fruit of that I got Suka as my son, the foremost of the Gnostics, and taught him completely the essence of the Vedas from the beginning to the end.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As a fruit of that I got Śuka as my son, the foremost of the Gnostics, and taught him completely the essence of the Vedas from the beginning to the end.

[Ch 24 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devarsī! When my son got wisdom from you, he left this world even when I became very distressed on his bereavement and wept aloud and he went away to the next world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devarṣī! When my son got wisdom from you, he left this world even when I became very distressed on his bereavement and wept aloud and he went away to the next world.

[Ch 24 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Very much afflicted for the parting of my son, I abandoned the great Mountain Meru. I got very lean due to the absence of my dear son whom I loved very much; and becoming very distressed and knowing this whole world to be an illusion, remembered my mother and went to the Kuru Jāṅgala district, as if bound up and controlled by the snares of Māyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Very much afflicted for the parting of my son, I abandoned the great Mountain Meru. I got very lean due to the absence of my dear son whom I loved very much; and becoming very distressed and knowing this whole world to be an illusion, I remembered my mother and went to the Kuru Jāṅgala district, as if bound up and controlled by the snares of Māyā.

[Ch 24 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When I heard that the King Śāntanu had married my mother, I built my hermitage on the holy banks of the Sarasvati and remained there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When I heard that the King Śāntanu had married my mother, I built my hermitage on the holy banks of the Sarasvatī and remained there.

[Ch 24 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the King Śāntanu went to the next world, my chaste mother remained with two sons. At that time Bhīṣma looked after their sustenance and maintained them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the King Śāntanu went to the next world, my chaste mother remained with two sons. At that time Bhīṣma looked after their sustenance and maintained them.

[Ch 24 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The intelligent Ganga's son Bhīsma Deva installed Cītrāngāda on the throne. A short while after this, Cītrāngada, too, looking like a second Cupid and extremely lovely, went to the jaws of death.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The intelligent Gaṅgā’s son Bhīṣma Deva installed Citrāṅgada on the throne. A short while after this, Citrāṅgada, too, looking like a second Cupid and extremely lovely, went to the jaws of death.

[Ch 24 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The mother Satyavatī was drowned in the sorrows for his son Cittāṅgada and began to weep for him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The mother Satyavatī was drowned in the sorrows for his son Citrāṅgada and began to weep for him.

[Ch 24 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Knowing my mother in that sorrowful condition, I went to her. Bhīṣma and I then consoled her with hopeful words. Bhīṣma Deva was averse to marrying and then becoming a King; and, therefore, he installed again the younger brother, the powerful Victiravirya on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Knowing my mother in that sorrowful condition, I went to her. Bhīṣma and I then consoled her with hopeful words. Bhīṣma Deva was averse to marrying and then becoming a King; and, therefore, he installed again the younger brother, the powerful Vicitravīrya on the throne.

[Ch 24 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Bhīṣma defeated by his own prowess the kings and brought the two daughters of the Kings Kāśtrāja and handed them over to Satyavati, so that she might give them over to Victiravīrya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Bhīṣma defeated by his own prowess the kings and brought the two daughters of the King Kāśīrāj and handed them over to Satyavatī, so that she might give

[Ch 24 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, on an auspicious day, and in an auspicious Lagna (moment) when the marriage ceremony of my brother Victiravriya was performed, I became glad.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, on an auspicious day, and in an auspicious Lagna (moment) when the marriage ceremony of my brother Vicitravīrya was performed, I became glad.

[Ch 24 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My brother, a good archer, was shortly afterwards attacked with consumption and thus he died without any issue.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My brother, a good archer, was shortly afterwards attacked with consumption and thus he died without any issue.

[Ch 24 Verse 30-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this my mother became very sad and dejected. Seeing the husband dead, the two daughters of Kāsirāja became ready to preserve their religion of chastity and said to their mother-in-law, sorrowful and weeping: "We two shall accompany our husband and become Satī (i.e., burnt up with our husbands). O Devi! We will go to the Heaven with your son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this my mother became very sad and dejected. Seeing the husband dead, the two daughters of Kāśīrāja became ready to preserve their religion of chastity and said to their mother-in-law, sorrowful and weeping :-- We two shall accompany our husbands and become Satī (i.e., be burnt up with our husbands). O Devī! We will go to the Heavens with your son.

[Ch 24 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We, the two sisters united, will enjoy with him in the Nandana Garden. The mother was very much attached to them and with the permission of Bhisma Deva, very affectionately made them desist from this great attempt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We, the two sisters united, will enjoy with him in the Nandana Garden. The mother was very much attached to them and with the permission of Bhīṣma Deva, very affectionately made them desist from this great attempt.

[Ch 24 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When all the funeral obsequies of Victiravīrya were over, my mother consulted with Bhīsma and remembered me in Hastināangara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When all the funeral obsequies of Vicitravīrya were over, my mother consulted with Bhīṣma and remembered me in Hastinānagara.

[Ch 24 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As soon as she remembered me, immediately I knew her mental feelings and hurriedly came to Hastināṅagara and, with my head bowed, fell prostrate before her feet, and with folded hands addressed my mother who was very much inflamed with the fire of sorrow for the death of her son, thus: O Mother! Why have you called me here mentally? I see you are very much dejected; I am your servant; order me what I can do for you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As soon as she remembered me, immediately I knew her mental feelings and hurriedly came to Hastinānagara and, with my head bowed, fell prostrate before her feet, and with folded hands addressed my mother who was very much inflamed with the fire of sorrow for the death of her son, thus :-- O Mother! Why have you called me here mentally? I see you are very much dejected; I am your servant; order me what I can do for you.

[Ch 24 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mother! You are my greatest place of pilgrimage and you are my highest deity; I am very anxious since I have come here; say that what you desire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Mother! You are my greatest place of pilgrimage and you are my highest deity; I am very anxious since I have come here; say what you desire.

[Ch 24 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O Best of Munis! When I said thus and waited before her, then she looked at Bhisma standing close by and said: “O Child! Your brother died of consumption; therefore I am very sorrowful, lest the family becomes extinct.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Best of Munis! When I said thus and waited before her, then she looked at Bhīṣma standing close by and said :-- “O Child! Your brother died of consumption; therefore I am very sorrowful, lest the family becomes extinct.

[Ch 24 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O son of Parāśara! you re-establish the name of Śāntanu that is going now to be well nigh extinct.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O son of Parāśara! You re-establish the name of Śāntanu that is going now to be well nigh extinct.

[Ch 24 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Vyāsa Deva! Relieve me soon from this sorrow of mine, lest this line be extinct. There are the two daughters of Kāśirāja, honest and good and endowed with youth and beauty.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Vyāsa Deva! Relieve me soon from this sorrow of mine, lest this line be extinct. There are the two daughters of Kāśīrāja, honest and good and endowed with youth and beauty.

[Ch 24 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Highly Intelligent One! Better you cohabit with them and save the family of Bharata by begetting sons. You will not be touched with any sin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Highly Intelligent One! Better you cohabit with them and save the family of Bhārata by begetting sons. You will not be touched with any sin.”

[Ch 24 Verse 45-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O Devarṣi! Hearing the mother's words, I became very anxious and humbly told her with great shame: "O Mother! To touch another's wife is a very sinful act; knowing well the path of Dharma, how can I willingly and intentionally violate that?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O Devarṣī! Hearing the mother’s words, I became very anxious and humbly told her with great shame :-- “O Mother! To touch another’s wife is a very sinful act; knowing well the path of Dharma, how can I willingly and intentionally violate that?

[Ch 24 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So also, the Maharsis say: That the wife of a younger brother is like a daughter. Studying all the Vedas, how can I do this blame-worthy and adulterous act?
NEW CORR ENG ──► So also, the Maharṣis say :-- That the wife of a younger brother is like a daughter. Studying all the Vedas, how can I do this blame-worthy and adulterous act?

[Ch 24 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To preserve a line of family by illegal ways is never to be done; for then the fathers of the sinners can never cross this ocean of world. How can he, who is the spiritual preceptor of all, and the writer of all the Purāṇas, do this act knowingly which is awfully strange and very bad and nasty in its nature.
NEW CORR ENG ──► To preserve a line of family by illegal ways is never to be done; for then the fathers of the sinners can never cross this ocean of world. How can he, who is the spiritual preceptor of all, and the writer of all the Purāṇas, do this act knowingly which is awfully strange and very bad and nasty in its nature.”

[Ch 24 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My mother was very much plunged into the sea of sorrows for the breavement of her son; so to preserve the family, She came again to me, weeping and said: "O son of Parāśara! If you follow my words, you wo'nnt incur any sin.
NEW CORR ENG ──► My mother was very much plunged into the sea of sorrows for the bereavement of her son; so to preserve the family, She came again to me, weeping and said :-- “O son of Parāśara! If you follow my word, you won’t iñcur any sin.

[Ch 24 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! If the reasonable words of the Gurus be even faulty, one should obey them according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Therefore, O Child! Keep my word and preserve my honour; no sin will touch you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! If the reasonable words of the Gurus be even faulty, one should obey them according to the tradition of the Śiṣṭas. Therefore, O Child! Keep my word and preserve my honour; no sin will touch you.

[Ch 24 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Child! Think very well. Your mother is very sorry and is immersed in the ocean of afflictions; therefore it is your paramount duty to make her happy by begetting child for the continuance of the family."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Child! Think very well. Your mother is very sorry and is immersed in the ocean of afflictions; therefore it is your paramount duty to make her happy by begetting child for the continuance of the family.”

[Ch 24 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing my mother speaking to me thus, Bhisma, the Ganga's son, the expert in finding out truth in fine points with regard to Dharma, said to me: "O Dvaipāyana! You are wholly sinless; you ought not therefore to argue on this point; obey your mother as she says and be happy."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing my mother speaking to me thus, Bhīṣma, the Gaṅgā’s son, the expert in finding out truth in fine points with regard to Dharma, said to me :-- O Dvaipāyana! You are wholly sinless; you ought not therefore to argue on this point; obey your mother as she says and be happy.

[Ch 24 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing his words and my mother's request, I decided to do this very hateful act with a fearless heart without any suspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing his words and my mother’s request, I decided to do this very hateful act with a fearless heart without any suspicion.

[Ch 24 Verse 57-58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Ambikā finished her ablutions after menstruation, I gladly cohabited with her in the night; but that young lady seeing my ugly ascetic form, was not attachment to me; I then cursed that beautiful woman thus: "As you closed your eyes at the first cohabitation with me, your son will be born blind."
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Ambikā finished her ablutions after menstruation, I gladly cohabited with her in the night; but that young lady seeing my ugly ascetic form, was not attached to me; I then cursed that beautiful woman thus :-- As you closed your eyes at the first cohabitation with me, your son will be born blind.

[Ch 24 Verse 59-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! On the second day my mother enquired me when I was alone: "O Dvaipāyana! Will there be born a son of the daughter of Kāśrāja? I then bowed my head with shame, and told "Mother! The son will be born blind, through my curse."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! On the second day my mother enquired me when I was alone :-- O Dvaipāyana! Will there be born a son of the daughter of Kāśīrāj? I then bowed my head with shame, and told, “Mother! The son will be born blind, through my curse.”

[Ch 24 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! The mother then rebuked me harshly "O Child! Why did you curse that the son of Ambikā would be born blind?" Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the description of Vikṣepa Śakti in the discourse between Vyāsa and Nārada in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! The mother then rebuked me harshly, “O Child! Why did you curse that the son of Ambikā would be born blind?” Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the description of Vikṣepa Śakti in the discourse between Vyāsa and Nārada in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
