[Ch 19 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: After the king Subāhu had spoken thus, the Queen made her daughter Śaśikālā, who had always sweet smiles on her lips sit on her lap and after consoling her with words, began to say "O fair eyed! You always practise vows and other religious performances; why are you, then, speaking these unpleasant words? The King has heard all what you wanted to say has been very sorry."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- After the king Subāhu had spoken thus, the Queen made her daughter Śaśikalā, who had always sweet smiles on her lips sit on her lap and after consoling her with sweet words, began to say “O fair eyed! You always practise vows and other religious performances; why are you, then, speaking these unpleasant words? The King has heard all what you wanted to say and has been very sorry.

[Ch 19 Verse 3-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Sudarśana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kindom, helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled with his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and thin. Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There are many learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal marks, princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this Swayamvara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Sudarśana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kingdom, helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled with his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and thin. Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There are many learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal marks, princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this Svayamvara.

[Ch 19 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is one brother of this Sudarśana, who is endowed with all kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified in various other ways. He is the king of the Kosala country.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is one brother of this Sudarśana, who is endowed with all kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified in various other ways. He is the king of the Kosala country.

[Ch 19 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The King Yudhājit is trying his best to kill Sudarśana on a befitting opportunity.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The King Yudhājit is trying his best to kill Sudarśana on a befitting opportunity.

[Ch 19 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate fight the king Virasena and installed his daughter's son on the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate fight the king Vīrasena and installed his daughter’s son on the throne.

[Ch 19 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bhāradvāja to kill Sudarśana; afterwords he was prevented by the Munis from doing so; then he returned home.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bhāradvāja to kill Sudarśana; afterwards he was prevented by the Munis from doing so then he returned home.”

[Ch 19 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sasikālā replied: "Mother! That prince, though staying in the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice of Saryāti, the chaste Sukanyā married Cyavana Muni and served her husband all along; so I will marry this king's son and will always be engaged in serving him. The women are able to attain heaven and emancipation, if they serve their husbands; therefore if we be sincere in serving our husbands, we will no doubt be happy."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaśikalā replied :-- “Mother! That prince, though staying in the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice Śaryāti, the chaste Sukanyā married Cyavana Muni and served her husband all along; so I will marry this king’s son and will always be engaged in serving him. The women are able to attain heaven and emancipation, if they serve their husbands; therefore if we be sincere in serving our husbands, we will no doubt be happy.

[Ch 19 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavatī has ordained him to be my husband; how can I now accept any other body as my husband than him?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavatī has ordained him to be my husband; how can I now accept any other body as my husband than him?

[Ch 19 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Bhuvaneśvari has pictured his frame firmly in my heart; I will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and to contract marriage with any other person."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Bhuvaneśvarī has pictured his frame firmly in my heart; I will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and to contract marriage with any other person.”

[Ch 19 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of Videha, found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to the King all the words of Saśikalā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of Videha, found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to the King all the words of Śaśikalā.

[Ch 19 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śaśikalā, on the day before the marriage day, became very anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brāhmīn, versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bhradvāja with this message “O Brāhmīn, go in such a way to Sudarśana, as my father be not able to know about it and tell Sudarśana all my words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śaśikalā, on the day before the marriage day, became very anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brāhmin, versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bhāradvāja with this message “O Brāhmaṇ, go in such a way to Sudarśana, as my father be not able to know about it and tell Sudarśana all my words.

[Ch 19 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My father has called in for my marriage a Swayamvara ceremony; many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O Deva! The Goddess Bhagavatī has ordered me in dream and accordingly I, with full gladness of my heart, have become yours already in my heart."
NEW CORR ENG ──► My father has called in for my marriage a Svayambara ceremony; many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O Deva! The Goddess Bhagavatī has ordered me in dream and accordingly I, with full gladness of my heart, have become yours already in my heart.

[Ch 19 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I can obey my father's and mother's words and marry another."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I can obey my father’s and mother’s words and marry another.

[Ch 19 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “By my mind word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; and pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings of the Bhagavati.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► By my mind, word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; and pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings of the Bhagavatī.

[Ch 19 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this universe, moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny and come to this place without fail."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this whole universe, moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny and come to this place without fail.

[Ch 19 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What the Goddess, whose commands Śankara all the other Devas obey, has ordered, an never turn out false.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What the Goddess, whose commands Śaṅkara all the other Devas obey, has ordered, can never turn out false.

[Ch 19 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Brāhmīn! You the foremost amongst the virtuous do therefore call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all these to him. What shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be fulfilled.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmin! You the foremost amongst the virtuous; do therefore call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all there to him. What shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be fullfilled.”

[Ch 19 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, she gave the Brāhmīn his Dakṣinā and sent him to Sudarśana. He went there and reported all the matter duly to him and quickly returned back.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, she gave the Brāhmin his Dakṣinā and sent him to Sudarśana. He went there and reported all the matter duly to him and quickly returned back.

[Ch 19 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On coming to know all this, Sudarśana determined to start; and the Maharṣī Bhāradvāja, with gladness, sent him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On coming to know all this, Sudarśana determined to start; and the Mahārṣi Bhāradvāja, with gladness, sent him.

[Ch 19 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Seeing her son ready to start, his mother Manoramā became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, thus spoke to his son.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Seeing her son ready to start, the mother Manoramā became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, thus spoke to her son.

[Ch 19 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Sudarśana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to go there in the Swayamvara alone, where are present kings and all your terrible enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King Yudhājit will certainly go there with the object of killing you; there will then be no other body to help you. So you should never go to that place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Sudarśana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to go there in the Svayamvara alone, where are present kings and all your terrible enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King Yudhājit will certainly go there with the object of killing you; there will then is no other body to help you. So you should never go to that place.

[Ch 19 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "You are my only son; I am very poor, and helpless; I have no other to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in despair at this moment."
NEW CORR ENG ──► You are my only son; I am very poor and helpless; I have no other to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in despair at this moment.

[Ch 19 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "See Sudarśana! King Yudhājit who had slain my father, that uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will certainly kill you."
NEW CORR ENG ──► See Sudarśana! The King Yudhājit who had slain my father, that uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will certainly kill you.”

[Ch 19 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana replied—“Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go at the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall of Swayamvara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana replied “Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go at the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall

[Ch 19 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by the grace of the Bhagavatī."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by the grace of the Bhagavatī.”

[Ch 19 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said. Thus saying, Sudarśana mounted on his chariot and was ready to start. Seeing this Manoramā began to bless him and so cheer him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Thus saying, Sudarśana mounted on his chariot and was ready to start. Seeing this Manoramā began to bless him and so cheer him.

[Ch 19 Verse 34-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Let Ambikā Devi protect your front; Padmalocanā protect your back; Pārvatī, your two sides; Šivā Devi, all around you; Vārāhi, in dreadful paths; Durgā, in royal forts, Kālikā, in terrible fights; Parameśvarī, in the platform hall; Mātāngī, in the Swayamvara hall; Bhavānī, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; Girijā, in mountain passes; Camundā, in the sacrificial ground, and let the eternal Kāmagā, protect you in the forests.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Let Ambikā Devī protect your front; Padmalocanā protect your back; Pārvatī, your two sides; Śivā Devī, all around you; Vārāhī, in dreadful paths; Durgā, in royal forts, Kālikā, in terrible fights; Parameśvarī, in the platform hall; Mātamgī, in the Svayamvara hall; Bhavanī, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; Girijā, in mountain passes; Camunḍā, in the sacrificial ground, and let the eternal Kāmagā, protect you in the forests.

[Ch 19 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vaiṣnavī force protect you in quarrels; let Bhairavi protect you in battles and amongst your enemies."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vaiṣnavī force protect you in quarrels; let Bhairavī protect you in battles and amongst your enemies.

[Ch 19 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Son! Let the Mahā Māyā Jagaddhātri Bhuvaneśvari protect you everywhere and at all times."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Son! Let the Mahā Māyā Jagaddhātrī Bhuvaneśvarī protect you everywhere and at all times.

[Ch 19 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Then Manoramā, speaking thus to him, trembled with fear and again said: "O Sudarśana, I will also accompany you; there will not be otherwise."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Then Manoramā, speaking thus to him, trembled with fear and again said :-- “O Sudarśana, I will also accompany you; there will not be otherwise.

[Ch 19 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carry me thither where you are desiring to go."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carrry me thither where you are desiring to go.”

[Ch 19 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. The Brāhmanas pronounced their blessings. All then went out.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. The Brāhmaṇas pronounced their blessings. All then went out.

[Ch 19 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then alone on his chariot and reached Benares. There King Subāhu, hearing that he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with various presents.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśan, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then alone on his chariot and reached Benares. There the King Subāhu, hearing that he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with various presents.

[Ch 19 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He gave him the house for his residence, and made arrangements for his food and drink and other necessary requirements and gave order to his servants to wait on the prince.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He gave him, the house for his residence, and made arrangements for his food and drink and other necessary requirements and gave order to his servants to wait on the prince.

[Ch 19 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and Yudhājit, too, come there accompanied by his daughter's son, Śatrujit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and Yudhājit, too, came there accompanied by his daughter’s son, Śatrujit.

[Ch 19 Verse 46-48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King of Karūṣa, the King of Madra, the King of Sindhu, the King of Māhimatī" the valiant warriors, the King of Pānāśla, the kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Kārṇāṭ, the powerful King of Kāmarūpa, the King of Cola, and the very powerful King of Vidarbhas with 180 Aksauhīnī soldiers all arrived and assembled there. Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► the King of Māhīsmatī, the valiant warriors, the King of Pāñcāla, the kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Karnat, the powerful King of Kāmarūpa, the King of Chola, and the very powerful King of Vidarbhas with 180 Akṣauhinī soldiers all arrived and assembled there. Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers.

[Ch 19 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to witness the Swayamvara ceremony.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to witness the Svayamvara ceremony.

[Ch 19 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the princes began to talk amongst them "The King's son Sudarśana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and calm."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the princes began to talk amongst them “The King’s son Sudarśana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and calm.

[Ch 19 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Is it that the high minded Sudarśana, born of the Kákuttsha family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Is it that the high minded Sudarśana, born of the Kākutstha family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry?

[Ch 19 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers and weapons, and select the long armed Sudarśana?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers and weapons, and select the long armed Sudarśana?”

[Ch 19 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then King Yudhājit addressed all the other kings "I will slay Sudarśana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the King Yudhājit addressed all the other kings “I will slay Sudarśana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this.”

[Ch 19 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Yudhājit's words, the king of Keral, the foremost of those who know morals, began to say: "O king! In this Icchā svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will no marriage for prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the bride elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; what cause can than there crop up here for quarrels?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Yudhājit’s words, the king of Keral, the foremost of those who know morals, began to say :-- “O king! In this Icchā svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will be no marriage for the prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the bride elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; what cause can then there crop up here for quarrels?

[Ch 19 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you are the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and installed your daughter's son on the throne."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you are the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and installed your daughter’s son on the throne.

[Ch 19 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! This Sudarśana is born of the Kākutstha family and the son of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This Sudarśan is born of the Kākutstha family and the son of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy?

[Ch 19 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful, know that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful know that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt it this.

[Ch 19 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma; always you find Adharma and Felsehood defeated. Therefore dost thou forsake your evil and mean intentions and pacify you vile mind."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma, always you find Adharma and Falsehood defeated. Therefore dost thou forsake your evil and mean intentions and pacify your vile mind.

[Ch 19 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Your daughter's son is also present here; he is beautiful and prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that birde elect him as bridegroom?"
NEW CORR ENG ──► Your daughter’s son is also present here; he is beautiful and prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that bride elect him as bridegroom?

[Ch 19 Verse 61-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Consider again that there are many other powerful princes and kings in this Swayarivara; the princess may select them also. Therefore let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection of the bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel can there crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here. Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Swayarivara assembly of Sudarśana and the other kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Consider again that there are many other powerful princes and kings in this Svayamvara; the princess may select them also. Therefore let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection of the bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel can there crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here.” Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Svayamvara assembly of Sudarśana and the other kings in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Mahārṣi Veda Vyāsa.
