CHAPTER XIX

On the Marriage

यास उवाच

भर्मा साउभित्रता बालां पुत्रीं कृतवांकसंस्थिताम् ।

उवाच चवचं रल्बणं समाभार्य शृचिंसिताम् ॥ 1 ॥

किं वृथा सुर्लित त्वं हि विधियं मय भायसे ।

पिता ते दुःखाम्पोति वाक्येनांनेन सुखते ॥ 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: After the king Subāhu had spoken thus, the Queen made her daughter Śaśikālā, who had always sweet smiles on her lips sit on her lap and after consoling her with words, began to say

"O fair eyed! You always practise vows and other religious performances; why are you, then, speaking these unpleasant words? The King has heard all what you wanted to say has been very sorry."

सुर्दोर्नोर्दिष्यांगेरो राज्यश्रो तिराशयः ।

बलकोशविद्रौनछ परित्यक्तसु बाँधवे: ॥ ३ ॥

मात्रा सह बनं प्राप्तः फतमूलाशनः कृतः ।

न ते योग्यो वरीउर्ध वै बनवासी च दुर्भर्भः ॥ 4 ॥

राज्यपुत्रा: कृतप्रजा रूपवंतः सुसंमतः ।

नहाहीं: पुत्रि सन्त्यये राजधिक्रतैलकृता: ॥ 5 ॥

That Sudarśana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kindom, helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled with his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and thin. Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There are many learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal marks, princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this Swayamvara.

भातास्थ वर्तते कानतः स राज्य कोसलेषु वे ।

कॉर्पीत रूपसमपत्रः सर्वतक्षणासंपुतः ॥ 6 ॥

There is one brother of this Sudarśana, who is endowed with all kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified in various other ways. He is the king of the Kosala country.

अन्यच्छ कारणं सुचु सुगु युच्च यथा श्रुतम् ।

युधासितततं तस्य वधकामोरितं घमिमः ॥ 7 ॥

There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The King Yudhājit is trying his best to kill Sudarśana on a befitting opportunity.

दीडिः: स्थापितसेन राज्य केल्यात्सितंगम् ।

वीरसेनं नृंं हृता संमंत्र सचिवः सह ॥ 8 ॥

He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate fight the king Virasena and installed his daughter's son on the throne.

भारद्वाजामं प्राणं हृतकाम: सुदर्शनम् ।

सुन्नि वातरि: पक्षाजगाम निममन्दितम् ॥ 9 ॥

Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bhāradvāja to kill Sudarśana; afterwords he was prevented by the Munis from doing so; then he returned home.

शशिकालोबाच

मातामेमितिः कामं वनस्योरपि नृपात्मजः ।

श्रवीतिवचनेनैव सुकान्य च पतितन्ति ॥ 10 ॥

च्यवनं च यथा प्राप्य पतिर्गुक्षणे रत ।

भतैगुशूपणं क्लीणां ख्वर्यँ मोक्षंत तथा ॥ 1 1 ॥

अक्तिवक्तृत नृनं सुखदं भवति सिक्याः ।

Sasikālā replied: "Mother! That prince, though

staying in the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice of Saryāti, the chaste Sukanyā married Cyavana Muni and served her husband all along; so I will marry this king's son and will always be engaged in serving him. The women are able to attain heaven and emancipation, if they serve their husbands; therefore if we be sincere in serving our husbands, we will no doubt be happy."

भगवत्या समादिष्ट स्वने वरमनुतमम् ॥ 12 ॥

तमुतेड़ह कर्थ चान्यं संशयामि नृपात्मजम् ।

I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavatī has ordained him to be my husband; how can I now accept any other body as my husband than him?

मचित्तभित्ती लिखितो भगवता सुढर्जनः ॥ 13 ॥

तं विहास प्रियं कानं करीचेउई न चापरम् ।

The Devi Bhuvaneśvari has pictured his frame firmly in my heart; I will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and to contract marriage with any other person."

व्यास उवाच

प्रत्यादिष्ठाश वैदर्भीं तया वहुनिर्वर्षेः ॥ १४ ॥

भर्तीरं सर्वमाचड युप्रोकतं वचनं भृगम् ।

Vyāsa said: Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of Videha, found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to the King all the words of Saśikalā.

विद्यार्थ्य दिनाद्वर्जागरं भूतसम्बित्नम् ॥ १ ५ ॥

हिड़ं शगशिकाल तत्र प्रेषयामास सत्वम् ।

यथा न वेदे मे ताततशा गच्छ सुरुर्नम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

भात्राजाग्रभे बृहि महाव्यान्तसा विभो ।

When Śaśikalā, on the day before the marriage day, became very anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brāhmīn, versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bhradvāja with this message “O Brāhmīn, go in such a way to Sudarśana, as my father be not able to know about it and tell Sudarśana all my words.

पित्रा मे सम्भूतः कामं मवर्धेन स्वयंवरः ॥ 17 ॥

आगमिष्यित नजानो बलयुक्ता हानेकशः ।


मया त्वं वै पृतछिते सर्वेधा प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ॥ 18 ॥

भगवता समाधिटः स्वप्रे मम सुरोपम् ।

My father has called in for my marriage a Swayamvara ceremony; many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O Deva! The Goddess Bhagavatī has ordered me in dream and accordingly I, with full gladness of my heart, have become yours already in my heart."

विषमधि हुतों हा प्रगतमि प्रदीपिति ॥ 19 ॥

वर्ये त्वन्ते नान्यं विवृष्यां प्रतितप्रति च ।

"Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I can obey my father's and mother's words and marry another."

मसा कर्मणा वाचा संवृत्तस्य मया करः ॥ 20 ॥

भगवत्या: प्रसादेन शर्माविष्यां भविष्यति ।

“By my mind word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; and pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings of the Bhagavati.”

आगात्मखं त्याद्यारे दैवं कृत्वा परं बलम् ॥ 21 ॥

यदधीनं जगत्सर्वे वर्ते सचराचरम् ।

"Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this universe, moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny and come to this place without fail."

भगवत्या यद्याष्ट्रं न तन्मिथ्या भविष्यति ॥ 22 ॥

यड़ुोे देवाना: सर्वा सर्तेने शड़ूरावय: ।

What the Goddess, whose commands Śankara all the other Devas obey, has ordered, an never turn out false.

वत्क्योजी तया इद्यरेकाने वै नुपातयकः ॥ 23 ॥

यथा भवति मे कार्य तत्कर्तेल्य त्वयान्च ।

“O Brāhmīn! You the foremost amongst the virtuous do therefore call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all these to him. What shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be fulfilled.”

इत्युक्चना दक्षिणां दत्ता मुनिन्विधापित्रतस्तथा ॥ 24 ॥

गाला सर्व निवेशागु तत्र प्रत्यागते हिजः ।

Thus saying, she gave the Brāhmīn his Dakṣinā

and sent him to Sudarśana. He went there and reported all the matter duly to him and quickly returned back.

सुदर्जनस्तु तत्ज्ञाला निश्छयं गमने तदा ॥ 25 ॥

चकार मुनिना तेन प्रेरितः परमादरात् ।

On coming to know all this, Sudarśana determined to start; and the Maharṣī Bhāradvāja, with gladness, sent him.

व्यास उवाच

गमनावोहतं पूरं तुमवाच मनोरमा ॥ 26 ॥

वेयमानासितु:खातां जाततयासम्युतोवनाः ।

Vyāsa said: Seeing her son ready to start, his mother Manoramā became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, thus spoke to his son.

कुरा गच्छसि पुराठ सभाजे पृभुतां किल ॥ 27 ॥

एकाकी कृतवैश्छ किं विविज्च स्वयंवरे ।

युधाजिब्छूतकामस्वां समेधिति महीपिति: ॥ 28 ॥

न तेऋ्योक्ति रहायशु तस्मायामा जज पुरक ।

“Sudarśana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to go there in the Swayamvara alone, where are present kings and all your terrible enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King Yudhājit will certainly go there with the object of killing you; there will then be no other body to help you. So you should never go to that place.

एकपुत्रातिहीनास्थि ततधारा निताधया ॥ 29 ॥

नाईस ति महापाण निराजां कतुभय मात् ।

"You are my only son; I am very poor, and helpless; I have no other to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in despair at this moment."

चित्त ते निह्त्तो येन सोर्धि त्रजागतो नुप: ॥ 30 ॥

एकाकिनं नत तत्र युधाजित्चां हनियति ।

"See Sudarśana! King Yudhājit who had slain my father, that uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will certainly kill you."

सुरर्शन उवाच

भवित्यं भवत्येव नात कार्या विचाराणि ॥ 31 ॥

आदेशाच्च जगन्मातुरीच्छाय्य स्वयंवरे ।

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Sudarśana replied—“Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go at the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall of Swayamvara.

मा शोक कुक कल्याणि क्षितयासि सचनाने ।

न विधोभि प्रसादेन भगवल्या नितन्तम् ॥ 32 ॥

O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by the grace of the Bhagavatī."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा ध्यामक्रह्मा नातुकामां सुदर्शनम् ॥ 33 ॥

दृष्ट्वा मनोरामा पुत्रमाणिर्भिश्रान्योदयत् ।

Vyāsa said. Thus saying, Sudarśana mounted on his chariot and was ready to start. Seeing this Manoramā began to bless him and so cheer him.

अग्रतले प्रमिका पातु पार्वती पातु पुछतः ॥ 34 ॥

पार्वती पार्थ्वीय: पातु शिक्षा सर्वेक सम्प्रात् ।

वाराही विषये मार्गे दुर्गा दुर्गेषु कर्हिंघित् ।

कालिका कलहे धोर पातु त्वां परमेश्धी ॥ 35 ॥

मगढ़ो तत्र मातर्जी तथा सौम्या स्वयंवेगे ।

भवानीं घुपमध्ये तु पातु त्वां भवमोचनी ॥ 36 ॥

निर्जित गिरितुर्णे घ्नापुढा चलयेयु च ।

कामगा काननेचेवे रक्षतु त्वां सनातनी ॥ 37 ॥

O Son! Let Ambikā Devi protect your front; Padmalocanā protect your back; Pārvatī, your two sides; Šivā Devi, all around you; Vārāhi, in dreadful paths; Durgā, in royal forts, Kālikā, in terrible fights; Parameśvarī, in the platform hall; Mātāngī, in the Swayamvara hall; Bhavānī, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; Girijā, in mountain passes; Camundā, in the sacrificial ground, and let the eternal Kāmagā, protect you in the forests.

विवादे बैध्वारी शक्तिर्वातांचा रघुद्धह ।

भेरची चरणे सीम्य श्रजूर्ण वै समागने ॥ 38 ॥

O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vaiṣnavī force protect you in quarrels; let Bhairavi protect you in battles and amongst your enemies."

सर्वेदा सर्वेशेषु पातु त्वां भुवनेश्वी ।

महामाया जगद्धाउं सचिद्वानन्द्रकिपिणी ॥ ३९ ॥

O Son! Let the Mahā Māyā Jagaddhātri Bhuvaneśvari protect you everywhere and at all times."

व्यास उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा तं तदा माता वेयमाता भयाकुत्ता ।

उवाचाड़ तव्या साध्यमागमिष्यासि सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

Vyāsa said: Then Manoramā, speaking thus to him, trembled with fear and again said: "O Sudarśana, I will also accompany you; there will not be otherwise."

निमिषार्थं बित्ता तांवे नाहं स्थातुमिहोत्सहे ।

सहैह नय मां बल्स यत्र ते नपने मति: ॥ 41 ॥

"I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carry me thither where you are desiring to go."

इयुक्णा नि:सृता माता धार्वौमंसुता तत ।

विर्देश्नानिष्यः सर्वे निविदूर्हेंसयुतः ॥ 42 ॥

Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. The Brāhmanas pronounced their blessings. All then went out.

वाताग्यां तत प्राता रथेनेकेन रावय: ।

ज्ञातः सुवाहूना तत भूजितश्राईगणिविभः ॥ 43 ॥

Sudarśana, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then alone on his chariot and reached Benares. There King Subāhu, hearing that he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with various presents.

निवेशार्थ गृहं दनमप्रणानाक्रिक तथा ।

सेवकं समनुजाय परिव्यार्थीयेव च ॥ 44 ॥

He gave him the house for his residence, and made arrangements for his food and drink and other necessary requirements and gave order to his servants to wait on the prince.

मिलितास्वध राजानो नानोर्हणाधियाः किल ।

युधाजिदयि सम्पातो दौहिजेण सम्पत्थितः ॥ 45 ॥

Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and Yudhājit, too, come there accompanied by his daughter's son, Śatrujit.

करूपाधिप्रतिश्रित तथा मद्रश्रो :पृतः ।

सिन्युगात्सधा वीरी योद्धा महिष्यतीपति: ॥ 4 6 ॥


पाङ्गाल: पर्वतीयघु कामरूपो3तिवीयन्ति।

काणार्टिशोलेद्रोयो वैदर्भें महावल: ॥ 47 ॥

अशौहिणी विश्रिक्षि मिलिता सहुवा ततं ।

वेहिता नगरी सा तु सै-यै: सर्वे संस्थिति: ॥ 48 ॥

The King of Karūṣa, the King of Madra, the King of Sindhu, the King of Māhimatī" the valiant warriors, the King of Pānāśla, the kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Kārṇāṭ, the powerful King of Kāmarūpa, the King of Cola, and the very powerful King of Vidarbhas with 180 Aksauhīnī soldiers all arrived and assembled there. Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers.

एते चान्ये च बहवः स्वयंवरिद्ध्वया ।

मिलितास्तत्र राजानो वरावरायर्वताः ॥ 4 9 ॥

Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to witness the Swayamvara ceremony.

अन्योयं नृपपुत्रास्त इत्यचूमिंलितास्तवा ।

सुदर्शनो नृपसुतो हागतोर्जित निराकूलः ॥ 50 ॥

Then the princes began to talk amongst them "The King's son Sudarśana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and calm."

एकाकी श्यामाहु मात्रा सह महामाति: ।

विद्याहार्थीमहावातः काकुल्य किं नु संग्राम ॥ 51 ॥

Is it that the high minded Sudarśana, born of the Kákuttsha family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry?

एताजाजुतांस्तवल्चा सरीन्यान्यापुधाना ।

किमेने राजकुत्री सा वार्थिति महापुत्रम् ॥ ५२ ॥

Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers and weapons, and select the long armed Sudarśana?

युधाजिवध राजेशस्तानुवाच महीपतीन् ।

अहमेनं हनियाथि कन्यार्थ नात्र संयाः ॥ ५३ ॥

Then King Yudhājit addressed all the other kings "I will slay Sudarśana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this."

केतलाधिपति: प्राह तं तदा नीतिस्तम: ।

नात्र युद्ध प्रकर्तैलं राजस्धिक्वल्यवंरे ॥ 54 ॥

बलेन हर्णं नास्ति नात्र शुल्क्यवयंरः ।

कन्येच्छया उर वर्णा विवादः कीनुशसिद्ध ॥ 55 ॥

Hearing Yudhājit's words, the king of Keral, the foremost of those who know morals, began to say: "O king! In this Icchā svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will no marriage for prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the bride elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; what cause can than there crop up here for quarrels?"

अन्यायेन त्वया पूर्वमसी राज्याध्वसितः ।

दौहित्रायार्थितं राज्यं बलवघुपसत्तम ॥ 56 ॥

"Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you are the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and installed your daughter's son on the throne."

काकुष्योयं महाभाग कोतलीघपतेः सुतः ।

कथमेनं राजपूत्रं हनियसि निरगामम् ॥ 57 ॥

“O King! This Sudarśana is born of the Kākutstha family and the son of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy?”

लप्यसे तत्कर्ते नूनमनवस्य नृपोतम् ।

गशास्तिक कडीशतुविषमुक्तानोर्य जगतयो: ॥ 58 ॥

"O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful, know that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt in this.

धर्मों जयित नाधर्म: सर्वे जयित नानुतम् ।

माउनवं कुरु राजेन्द्र तवप पापमति किल ॥ 59 ॥

O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma; always you find Adharma and Felsehood defeated. Therefore dost thou forsake your evil and mean intentions and pacify you vile mind."

दौहित्रलत समुपान: सोप्री कृपसमयित: ।

राजयुक्तलया श्रीमान्कर्ष तं न वरियिति ॥ 60 ॥

"Your daughter's son is also present here; he is beautiful and prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that birde elect him as bridegroom?"

अन्ये राजसुता: कामं वत्ने क्ललतसा: ।

कन्यास्वयंवरे कन्या स्वीकार्थिति सामगन्ति ॥ 6 1 ॥

युते तथा विवाद: कः प्रवदन्तु महीभुज: ।

परस्यं विरोधोउत्र न कर्तव्यो विज्ञानता ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकन्थे

एकानाविशोउधाय: ॥ 63 ॥ 

Consider again that there are many other powerful princes and kings in this Swayarivara; the princess may select them also. Therefore let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection

of the bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel can there crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here.

Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Swayarivara assembly of Sudarśana and the other kings in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Srimaddevibhāgavatam

