[Ch 28 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Hearing the words of Yama, the chaste intelligent Śāvitrī, replied with great devotion:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Hearing the words of Yama, the chaste intelligent Sāvitrī, replied with great devotion :--

[Ch 28 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Dharmarājan! What is Karma? Why and how is its origin? What is the cause of Karma? Who is the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? What is this body? And who is it that does Karma?
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Dharmarājan! What is Karma? Why and how is its origin? What is the cause of Karma? Who is the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? What is this body? And who is it that does Karma?

[Ch 28 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What is Jñāna? What is Buddhī? What is this Prānas of this embodied Jīva? What are the Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And what are the Devatās thereof? Who is it that enjoys and who is it that makes one enjoy? What is this enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of escape from it? And what is the nature of that State when one escapes from enjoyment? What is the nature of Jīvatāma? And what of Paramātmā? O Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► What is Jñāna? What is Buddhi? What is this Prāṇa of this embodied Jīva? What are the Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And what are the Devatās thereof? Who is it that enjoys and who is it that makes one enjoy? What is this enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of escape from it? And what is the nature of that State when one escapes from enjoyment? What is the nature of Jīvatmā? And what of Paramātmā? O Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.”

[Ch 28 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharma said: “Karma is of two kinds—good and bad. The Karma that is stated in the Vedas as leading to Dharma is good; all other actions are bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends (Sañkalpa) and without the hope of any fruits thereof (ahaitukī), is of such a nature as to root out all the Karmas and gives rise to the highest devotion to God.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma said :-- Karma is of two kinds: good and bad. The Karma that is stated in the Vedas as leading to Dharma is good; all other actions are bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends (Saṅkalpa) and without the hope of any fruits thereof (ahaitukī), is of such a nature as to root out all the Karmas and gives rise to the highest devotion to God.

[Ch 28 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahma becomes liberated, so the Śrutis say. Who then does the Karma and who is it that enjoys? (i.e., no such body). To such a Bhakta to Brahma, there is birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any fear. O Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by all in the Śrutis. The one leads to Nirvāṇa and the other leads to the nature of Hari. The Vaiṣṇavas want the Bhakti to Hari ॥.e. the Saguna Bhakti.
NEW CORR ENG ──► A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahmā becomes liberated, so the Śrutis say. Who then does the Karma and who is it that enjoys? (i.e., no such body). To such a Bhakta to Brahmā, there is no birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any fear. O Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by all in the Śrutis. The one leads to Nirvāṇa and the other leads to the nature of Hari. The Vaiṣṇavas want the Bhakti to Hari, i.e., the Saguṇa Bhakti.

[Ch 28 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The other Yogis and the knowers of Brahma want the Nirguna Bhakti. He who is the Seed of Karma, and the Bestower for ever the fruits of Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mūla Prakrti, is the Bhagavān; He is the Highest Self. He is the Material Cause of Karma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The other Yogis and the best knowers of Brahmā want the Nirguṇa Bhakti. He who is the Seed of Karma, and the Bestower for ever the fruits of Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mūla Prakriti, is the Bhagavān; He is the Highest Self. He is the Material Cause of Karma.

[Ch 28 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve and die. Earth, air, âkâša, water, and fire these are the threads, as it were, of the work of creation of Brahma Who is of the nature of Being, 'Dehî' or the Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Kartâ; he is the enjoyer; and Âtmâ (self) is the prompter, the stimulator within to do the Karma and enjoy the fruits thereof.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve and die. Earth, air, ākāśa, water, and fire; these are the threads, as it were, of the work of creation of Brahmā, Who is of the nature of Being. “Dehī” or The Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Kartā; he is the enjoyer; and Ātmā (self) is the prompter, the stimulator within to do the Karma and enjoy the fruits thereof.

[Ch 28 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The experiencing of pleasures and pains and the varieties thereof is known as Bhoga (enjoyment). Liberation, Mukti is the escape there from. The knowledge by which Âtmā (sat) and Māyā (Asat) are discriminated is called Jñānam (Brahma Jñānam).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The experiencing of pleasures and pains and the varieties thereof is known as Bhoga (enjoyment). Liberation, Mukti is the escape therefrom. The knowledge by which Ātmā (sat) and Māyā (Asat) are discriminated is called Jñānam (Brahmā Jñānam).

[Ch 28 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The knowledge is considered as the root discriminator of various objects of enjoyments. (i.e. by which the various objects are at once recognised as different from Âtman). By Buddhi is meant the right seeing of things, (as certain) and is considered as the seed of Jñānam. By Prāna is known as the different Vāyus in the body. And this Prāna is the strength of the embodied.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The knowledge is considered as the root discriminator of various objects of enjoyments (i.e., by which the various objects are at once recognised as different from Ātmān). By Buddhi is meant the right seeing of things, (as certain) and is considered as the seed of Jñānam. By Prāṇa is known as the different Vāyus in the body. And this Prāṇa is the strength of the embodied.

[Ch 28 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it is a part of Íśvara; its characteristic is its doubtful uncertain state. It impels to all actions, irresistible. It is inascertainable, invisible; it obstructs the Jñāna. The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were. of the embodied and the impellers to all actions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it is a part of Īśvara; its characteristic is its doubtful uncertain state. It impels to all actions, irresistible. It is inascertainable, invisible; it obstructs the Jñāna. The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were, of the embodied and the impellers to all actions.

[Ch 28 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are both enemies and friends as they give pain (when attached to wordly objects) and happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both. The Sun, Vāyu, Earth, Brahmā and others are their Devatās. The Jīva is the holder, the sustainer of Prāna, body, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are both enemies and friends as they give pain (when attached to worldly objects) and happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both. The Sun, Vāyu, Earth, Brahmā and others are their Devatās. The Jīva is the holder, the sustainer of Prāṇa, body, etc.

[Ch 28 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Paramātmā, the Highest Self, is the Best of all, Omnipresent, transcending the Gunas, and beyond Prakṛti. He is the Cause of all causes and He is the Brahma Itself. O Chaste One! I have replied, according to the Śāstras to all your questions. These are Jñānas of the Jñāniens. O Child! Now go back to your house at pleasure.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Paramātmā, the Highest Self, is the Best of all, Omnipresent, transcending the the Guṇas, and beyond Prakriti. He is the Cause of all causes and He is the Brahmā Itself. O Chaste One! I have replied, according to the Śāstras to all your questions. These are Jñānas of the Jñānins. O Child! Now go back to your house at pleasure.

[Ch 28 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sāvitrī said: “Whither shall I go, leaving my Husband and Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please oughtest to answer the queries that I now put to Thee. What wombs do the Jivas get in response to which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? And what Karmas lead to various hells?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sāvitrī said :-- Whither shall I go, leaving my Husband and Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please oughtest to answer the queries that I now put to Thee. What wombs do the Jīvas get in response to which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? And what Karmas lead to various hells?

[Ch 28 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Which Karmas lead to Mukti? And which Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi and what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas make one's life long? or short? Which Karmas again make one happy? And what Karmas make one miserable?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Which Karmas lead to Mukti? And which Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi and what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas make one’s life long? or short? Which Karmas again make one happy? And what Karmas make one miserable?

[Ch 28 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Which Karmas make one deformed in one's limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which Karmas again make one mad? Make one very much avaricious or of a stealing habit? What Karmas make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn the four Lokas Sālokya, etc.?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Which Karmas make one deformed in one’s limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which Karmas again make one mad? Make one very much avaricious or of a stealing habit? What Karmas make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn the four Lokas Sālokya, etc.?

[Ch 28 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What Karmas make one a Brāhmīn or an ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuntha? What Karmas enable one to go to Goloka, the par excellence and free from all diseases? How many are the hells? What are their names and how do they appear?
NEW CORR ENG ──► What Karmas make one a Brāhmin or an ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuṇṭha? What Karmas enable one to go to Goloka, the par excellence and free from all diseases? How many are the hells? What are their names and how do they appear?

[Ch 28 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► How long will one have to remain in each hell? and what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, Now tell me about these that I have asked to you and oblige." Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Śavitri Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► How long will one have to remain in each hell? and what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, now tell me about these that I have asked to you and oblige. Here ends the Twenty-Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Sāvitrī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
