CHAPTER XXVIII

On Sāvitri

श्रीनारायण उवाच

यमस्य वचनं श्रुत्वा सावित्री च पतित्रता ।

तृछाव परया भक्त्या तमुवाच मनस्विनो ॥ १ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Hearing the words of Yama, the chaste intelligent Śāvitrī, replied with great devotion:

साविश्यचार

किं कर्म तद्वरेकेन को वा तद्वौरुचे व।

को वा देड़ी च देड़: कः को वाउज कर्मकारकः ॥ 2 ॥

“O Dharmarājan! What is Karma? Why and how is its origin? What is the cause of Karma? Who is the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? What is this body? And who is it that does Karma?

किं वा ज्ञानं च बुद्धिः कः को वा ग्राणः शरीरिणाम् ।

कान्नींद्रयाणि किं तेषां लक्षणं दे्वताक्षः का: ॥ 3 ॥

भोक्ता भोजयिता को वा को भोगक्ष निष्कृति: ।

को जीव: परमात्मा कस्तने व्याख्यातुमहैति ॥ 4 ॥

What is Jñāna? What is Buddhī? What is this Prānas of this embodied Jīva? What are the Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And what are the Devatās thereof? Who is it that enjoys and who is it that makes one enjoy? What is this enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of escape from it? And what is the nature of that State when one escapes from enjoyment? What is the nature of Jīvatāma? And what of Paramātmā? O Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.”

धर्म जवाच

वेद्यपिहिता धर्मः कर्मं चमकुलं परम् ।

अर्वैदिकं तु यत्कर्म तदेवाणुभयं च ।। ५ ॥

अंहैतुकी देवसेवा संकल्परहिता सती ।

कर्मनिर्मूलकूपा च सा एव परभक्तिदा ॥ ६ ॥

Dharma said: “Karma is of two kinds—good and bad. The Karma that is stated in the Vedas as leading to Dharma is good; all other actions are bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends (Sañkalpa) and without the hope of any fruits thereof (ahaitukī), is of such a nature as to root out all the Karmas and gives rise to the highest devotion to God.

को वा कर्मफलं धुने को वा निस्थित एव च ।

ब्रहभफ्तो यो नरुश स च मुक्तः शुतः शुर्ति ॥ 7 ॥

जन्मानुखुजायधिजीकभीतितिवर्षितः ।

भक्तिश्र दिविधा साधिव श्रुन्ता सर्वसंमता ॥ 8 ॥

A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahma becomes liberated, so the Śrutis say. Who then does the Karma and who is it that enjoys? (i.e., no such body). To such a Bhakta to Brahma, there is birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any fear. O Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by all in the Śrutis. The one leads to Nirvāṇa and the other leads to the nature of Hari. The Vaiṣṇavas want the Bhakti to Hari i.e. the Saguna Bhakti.

निर्वाणपद्वात्री च हरित्वपद्वा नृणान् ।

हरित्वपत्रवक्ता च भक्ति वांक्षित वैभाणाः ॥ ९ ॥

The other Yogis and the knowers of Brahma want the Nirguna Bhakti. He who is the Seed of Karma, and the Bestower for ever the fruits of Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mūla Prakrti, is the Bhagavān; He is the Highest Self. He is the Material Cause of Karma.

अन्ये निर्वर्णमिच्छित योगीने बहाविनामः ।

कर्मणी बीजल्पघु सततं तत्फलप्रदः ॥ 10 ॥

कर्मरूपघु भगवान्यातमा प्रकृति: परा ।

सोर्पि तद्वेतुल्यश्रदेशे नधर एव च ॥ 11 ॥

Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve and die. Earth, air, âkâša, water, and fire these are the threads, as it were, of the work of creation of Brahma Who is of the nature of Being, 'Dehî' or the Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Kartâ; he is the enjoyer; and Âtmâ (self) is the prompter, the stimulator within to do the Karma and enjoy the fruits thereof.

भृथिवी वायुराकाणे जलं तेजसत्यैव च ।

एतानि सूत्रस्पानि सुहिक्रतपिधी सतः ॥ 12 ॥

कर्म कर्ता वे दौही च आत्मा भोजयिता सहा ।

भोगो विषयचेघड शिकृततिरुप्तिक्तच च ॥ 13 ॥

The experiencing of pleasures and pains and the varieties thereof is known as Bhoga (enjoyment). Liberation, Mukti is the escape there from. The knowledge by which Âtmā (sat) and Māyā (Asat) are discriminated is called Jñānam (Brahma Jñānam).

सदसद्देवाबीचे च ज्ञानं नानाविधं भयेत् ।

वियवाणां विभाणानां भेदे बीजं च कॉलितम् ॥ 14 ॥

बुद्धिद्विवेवना सा च ज्ञानवीयं श्रुते श्रुतम् ।

वायुभेदाङ्ग प्राणाङ्ग लल्कापाङ्ग देहितम् ॥ 15 ॥

The knowledge is considered as the root discriminator of various objects of enjoyments. (i.e. by which the various objects are at once recognised as different from Âtman). By Buddhi is meant the right seeing of things, (as certain) and is considered as the seed of Jñānam. By Prāna is known as the different Vāyus in the body. And this Prāna is the strength of the embodied.

इन्द्रियाणां च प्रवरमीधरांगसमूहकम् ।

प्रेकं कर्माणां चैव सुनिवार्यं च देहिनम् ॥ 16 ॥

अनिल्वापत्रुयं च ज्ञान्पेहो मन: स्मृतः ।

लोचनं श्वर्ण प्राणं त्वक्च रसनर्पिरिद्यम् ॥ 17 ॥

Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it is a part of Íśvara; its characteristic is its doubtful uncertain state. It impels to all actions, irresistible. It is inascertainable, invisible; it obstructs the Jñāna. The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were. of the embodied and the impellers to all actions.

अंगिनाभारतं च प्रेकं सर्वकंभाणम् ।

रिपुत्वं मित्रकं सुखलयं च दुःखदम् ॥ 18 ॥

सूर्यों वायुँघ झबहादा देवतः स्मृतः ।

प्राणदेहादिपृष्ठा हि स जीव: परिकितिः ॥ 19 ॥

They are both enemies and friends as they give pain (when attached to wordly objects) and happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both.

Book IX Chapter XXIX

The Sun, Vāyu, Earth, Brahmā and others are their Devatās. The Jīva is the holder, the sustainer of Prāna, body, etc.

परमं व्यापकं बढ़ा निरुण: प्रकृते पर: ।

कारणं कारणानां च परमात्मा स उच्यते ॥ 20 ॥

जूतेवं कथितं सर्व त्वया पूरं यथागाम् ।

ज्ञानिनां ज्ञानकरं च गच्छ वसे यथासुखम् ॥ 21 ॥

The Paramātmā, the Highest Self, is the Best of all, Omnipresent, transcending the Gunas, and beyond Prakṛti. He is the Cause of all causes and He is the Brahma Itself. O Chaste One! I have replied, according to the Śāstras to all your questions. These are Jñānas of the Jñāniens. O Child! Now go back to your house at pleasure.”

सायिश्यवाच

त्यक्त्या क्य याथी कांत तां वां तां शानार्थं धुवम् ।

यद्यक्तोपि प्रश्नं च तद्वाव्यक्तुमंतीति ॥ 22 ॥

कां कां योनि याति जीवः कर्माण केन वा पुनः ।

केन वा कर्माण स्वर्ग केन वा नरकर्गितः ॥ 23 ॥

Sāvitrī said: “Whither shall I go, leaving my Husband and Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please oughtest to answer the queries that I now put to Thee. What wombs do the Jivas get in response to which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? And what Karmas lead to various hells?

केन वा कर्मण मुक्तः केन भक्तिभवैद्युर्गे ।

केन वा कर्मण योगी रोगी वा केन कर्मण ।। 24 ।।

केन वा दीर्घजीवी च केनाल्यायुक्ष कर्मण ।

केन वा कर्मणःखी सुखी वा केन कर्मण। 25 ॥

Which Karmas lead to Mukti? And which Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi and what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas make one's life long? or short? Which Karmas

again make one happy? And what Karmas make one miserable?

अंगहीनिछ्छ काणिष बधिरः केन कर्माण ।

अंधो वा गंगुरपि च प्रमानः केन कर्मणि ॥ 26 ॥

क्षिलो5तितृष्ककशीः केन वा कर्मण भवेत् ।

केन सिद्धिमवापनोत सालोक्यादि चतुध्यम् ॥ 27 ॥

Which Karmas make one deformed in one's limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which Karmas again make one mad? Make one very much avaricious or of a stealing habit? What Karmas make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn the four Lokas Sālokya, etc.?

केना बा ब्राह्मणास्वे च तपस्तिव्वचं च केना व ।

स्वर्गभोगादिकं केन वैकुण्डं केन कर्मणि ॥ 28 ॥

गोलोकं केन वा ब्रह्म-संर्वाल्कृहं नितामयम् ।

नको वा कातिथितः किंसंख्यो नाम किं च वा ॥ 29 ॥

What Karmas make one a Brāhmīn or an ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuntha? What Karmas enable one to go to Goloka, the par excellence and free from all diseases? How many are the hells? What are their names and how do they appear?

को वा के नरके याति क्रियांते तेषु तिष्ठिति ।

पाधिनां कर्मण केन को वा व्याधिः प्रजायते ॥

यद्धलियं मवा पृष्टं तमे व्याख्यातुर्महिति ॥ 30 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभगवतो नवमरकन्चे गरदनारायणसंवादे

साविशुपधावनोउद्धाविरोअधायः ॥ 31 ॥

How long will one have to remain in each hell? and what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, Now tell me about these that I have asked to you and oblige."

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of Śavitri Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāṣa.

Book IX Chapter XXIX

