CHAPTER XVIII

On the Greatness of the Devi Pājā

श्रीनारद उवाच

पूजाविशेषों श्रीद्वतः श्रोतुमिच्छामि मान्द।

येनाश्रितेन मनुजः कृतकृत्यल्यमावहैत् ॥ १ ॥

Nārada spoke: O Bhagavān! I am now very eager to hear the special Pūjā of Śri Devi. The people get their desires fulfilled if they worship Her.

श्रीनाराय शवाचa

देवर्वे शृणु वक्ष्यामि श्रीमातु: पूजनकामम् ।

प्रतिभूषित्भूदं साक्षात्समलाप्रविवरणम् ॥ 2 ॥

आचायं भीनी संकल्य भृतगुद्वार्यिकं चेत् ।

मातृकान्यासूद्रं तु वडंन्यासमाचरेत् ॥ 3 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Devarsī! I shall now specially speak to you how the World Mother Bhagavatī is worshipped; by worshipping Whom one easily gets objects of enjoyments, liberation and the destruction of all evils. Controlling one's speech and making Ācamana, one must make one's saṅkalpa and perform Bhūtaśuddhi, Mārṭkānyāsa, Śadangānyāsa.

गंखस्य स्वापनं कृत्वा सामान्यार्थं विधाय च ।

पुजारुव्याणि चासेण प्रोक्षेयन्मिताम्बतः ॥ 4 ॥

गुरोत्नुजामाठ्य ततः पूजां समारभेत् ।

पौदपूजां पुरा कृत्वा देहीं ध्यायतेतः परम् ॥ 5 ॥

Placing conchshell and doing other necessary acts. Offering the ordinary Arghya, one should give special Arghya and with the mantra “Astrāya Phaṭ” sprinkle over all the articles brought for worship. Taking the Guru’s permission, he is to go on with his Pūjā. First worship the pīthā or seat whereon the Devi would be placed; then perform dhyāna (meditation of the Devi).

आसनावुषचारैது भक्तिभ्यमुतां सदा ।

स्नापयेतद्येदीं तां पंचागुत्सादिधि: ॥ 6 ॥

पौद्धुक्षत्सूर्णैस्ट कलगैः शनतंखकैः ।

Then with great devotion, offer to the Deva, the seats (āsana) and other articles of worship; then perform the bath of the Devi by the water of the

Pañcāmtra (the five nectars).

स्नायेघो महोर्जानी न स घ्योर्जभिवाते ॥ 7 ॥

यश् चृतारसैरे स्नायेऊनार्विकाम् ।

वेदसारायणं कृता रसेनेछूद्वन वा ॥ 8 ॥

तद्रोंहं न त्वजेत्रितं रमा चैव सरस्वती ।

यस्तु श्रहाससैने वेदपारायणं चरन् ॥ 9 ॥

अभिपिचेभट्रिंशानी सकुटुंवो नतिभम् ।

If anybody performs the bath ceremony of Śrī Devi with one hundred jars of sugarcane juice, he will not have to incur any future birth. He who performs this bath, and recites the Veda Mantras, with mango juice or sugarcane juice gets for ever Lakṣmī ever and ever and Sarasvati bound at his doors. He who gets this sacred bath of the Devi with grape juice, along with his relatives and acquaintances dwells in the Devi-loka for as many years as there are atoms in the juice.

रसरेपुगमणं च देवीलोके महीयते ॥ 10 ॥

कर्पूरगुरुकास्पीरकस्तूर्वंकर्पिकैलेः ।

सलिलेः रसायदेही वेदपारायणं चन्त् ॥ 11 ॥

भस्मीभवर्ति पापानि शतन्मार्जितानि च ।

यो दुर्धकलगैर्वेदीं रसापद्रेदपततः ॥ 12 ॥

आकल्प स वसोस्त्यं तस्मिन्ये क्षीरसागरे ।

यस्तु दर्शनार्थिचितं दर्दिकुत्पत्यापितर्षिचे ॥ 13 ॥

He who bathes the Devi with the Vedic mantras, and with water scented with camphor, the fragrant aloe wood (aguu), saffron, and musk, becomes freed at once of the sins acquired in his hundred births. He who bathes the Devi with jars of milk, lives in the ocean of milk (ksira samudra) for one Kalpa. So he who does this bathing ceremony with jars of curd, becomes the lord of Dadhikunḍa (the reservoir of curd).

मधुता च मृतेने तथा शक्रास्पि च ।

सापयेमधुकूल्यादिवटीना से पतिभवैते ॥ 14 ॥

सहस्कलशैर्दैं सनाय्यभक्तित्वरः ।

Book XI Chapter XVIII

इह लोके सुखी भृत्वाव्य-नलोके सुखी भवेत् ॥ 15 ॥

He who performs the Sñānams of the Devi with honey, ghee and sugar becomes the lord of these things. He who bathes the Devi with one thousand jars, becomes happy in this world as in the next.

Note: Make the liquid current flow pure in your body is the esoteric meaning of the bath.

हौमो वस्त्रद्धं दत्ता वायुलोकं स गच्छति ।

त्वनिर्मिनिभूषाणां दाता निधिपतिभंचे ॥ १ ६ ॥

कार्यगीरचंदनं दत्ता कस्तूरीविद्युभूषितम् ।

तथा सीमितिसूरं चरणो3लकफयकम ।। १७ ।।

इंत्रासने समाक्ठो भवेद्वयपति: परः ।

If you give Her a pair of silken clothes, you will go to the Vāyu-Lokā. If you give Her the jewel ornaments, you will become the Lord of gems and jewels. (Make your mind like the gem). If anybody gives saffron, sandalpaste, musk, Sindūra and Śalaktak (red things), he will go to the Heavens and become there the Indra, the Lord of the Devas, in the next birth.

पूषाणि विविधान्याहु: पूजाकर्मणि साधावः ॥ 18 ॥

तानि दत्ता यथालाभ केलासं लभो स्वयम् ।

Various flowers ought to be offered in Śrī Bhagavati's worship; or the flowers of the season offered to the Devi will lead the devotee to Kailāśa.

बिल्वपत्राण्यभोधानि यो द्वात्परशफ्चे ॥ १९ ॥

तस्य दुःखं कदाचिच्च कवचिच्च न बाधिविति ।

बिल्वपत्रत्रयंे रक्तचन्दनेन तु संलिखेत् ॥ 20 ॥

मायाकीजरयं यंलात्यस्मूटं चातिसुंदरम् ।

मायाकीजादिकं नाम चतुर्थतीं समुच्चेरि । २१ ॥

नामोउतं परया भकत्या देवीचरणपंक्से ।

समपर्येन्महादेखे कोमलं तच्च पत्रकम् ॥ 2 2 ॥

The devotee that offers the beautiful Bel leaves to the Devi never experiences anywhere pains and difficulties. The devotee who writes the Bijā mantra of Māyā “Hrim Bhuvaneśvaryai Namah” with red sandalpaste thrice on the tri-leaves of the Bilva tree leaf and offers this to the lotus feet of the Devi, becomes Manu by the merit of this virtuous act!

य एवं कुकते भकत्वा मनुत्वं क्षपते हि सः ।

यस्तु कोदिहरैंव कोमहरितिनमंले: ॥ 23 ॥

The devotee becomes the Lord of the whole universe who worships the Devi Bhagavatī with ten millions of entire Bilva leaves, fresh, green and spotless.

पूजयेद्व्वर्शान्ती बह्रांडाधिपतिभैवत् ।

कुन्द्वपृषेकैवीनन्तु लुलिंगर्भगतः ॥ 24 ॥

कोदिसंखै: पुवंन्तु प्राजाण्यं लभेद्युष्म ।

मल्लकामालतीपुष्यैराधोन लोलिः : ॥ 25 ॥

कोदिसंखै: पुवगा तु जायते स चतुपुंखः ।

दरगकोदिभिययंे तैरत कुर्मुर्भेने ॥ 26 ॥

If any devotee worships with ten millions of entire fresh green Kunda flowers, with eight scents, he gets surely the Prajāpatihood. The worship of the Devi with ten millions of Mallikā and Mālatī flowers besmeared with eight scents makes a man the four faced (Brahmā); and one hundred millions of such flowers will make the devotee a Viṣṇu.

विष्णुले भकने मत्वीं यस्नुंवयि दुलैभम् ।

विष्णुनेतद्धतं पूर्वे कृतं स्वपदल्वधये ॥ 27 ॥

गतकाटिभिपयेल सूत्रातन्त्र बजेद्युवम् ।

ब्रातमेततुगा सम्यककृतं भक्त्या प्रयन्ततः ॥ 28 ॥

In days of yore, Viṣṇu worshipped the Devi in the aforesaid way and so got His Viṣṇuhood. If any devotee worships the Devi with one hundred Kotis of Mallikā or Mālatī flowers, the man becomes certainly Surtātmā Hiranyagarbha.

तेन ब्रातप्रभावे हिरण्योतरां ब्रजेत् ।

जपाकुसुमपुष्यस्य बंधकुकुसुमस्य चे ॥29 ॥

दाडिमीकुसुमस्यापि विधिपेयु उदीरितः ।

एवम्यानापि पुष्पाणि श्रीदेवे विधिपार्पयेत् ॥ 30 ॥

तस्य पुण्यफल्यांतं न जानातीक्ष्योरूप सः ।

तत्ततूद्धरे: पुर्णैनमसाहस्यसंख्या ॥ 31 ॥

In ancient days Hiranyagarbha worshipped thus the Devi with great devotion and so he became Hiranyagarbha! (These Hiranyagarbha, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśa were mere ordinary men before. See the Brhadāranyaka Upaniṣada).

Note: The eight scents refer to Jatāmāmsī Kapiyutā Śaktergandhāṣtakam! So will be the results if Javā, Bandhūka and Dādimī flowers be offered in the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Bandhūka and Dādimī flowers be offered in the worship. Various other beautiful flowers can be offered duly to the Devi by the devotee. The merits accruing from such offers are not known even to the God Iśvara. The flowers that spring in their proper seasons are to be offered every year to the Devi, repeating Her thousand names enumerated in the Twelfth Book or in the Kūrma Purāna.

संभयंैभृहैये प्रतिवर्षमतंत्रितः ।

य एवं कुन्ते भक्प्या महापातकर्मयुत: ॥ 32 ॥

उपपातकमुक्तोर्षि मुच्यते सर्वपातकः ।

देहांते श्रीपदांचीजे तुर्वर्णे देवस्तमनैः ॥ 33 ॥

If the above worship be offered to the Devi, then that man, whether he be a sinner or a great sinner, will be freed from all the sins and after leaving his mortal coil, he will get, no doubt, the lotus feet of the Śrī Devi Bhagavatī.

प्राप्नोति साधाकवरो मुने नात्स्वर संग्रयः ।

कृष्णागुरु सकर्षेरं चंद्रने समवित्न ।। ३४ ॥

सित्कृके चाज्यसंयुक्ते गुगुलेन समवित्नम् ।

धूपं द्वाभ्यमहावेदे येन स्वायदुपितं गृहम् ॥ ३ ५ ॥

Offer Dhūpa made of black Aguru, camphor, sandalpaste, red sandalpaste, Sihlaka and Guggula, saturated with ghee in such a way as the whole room of Śrī Bhagavatī scents with pure fragrant smell.

तेन प्रसना देवेशी द्वातीि भुवनत्रयम् ।

दीपाकुर्प्रौकईश्व द्वाद्वोहै नितनगम ॥ 3 6 ॥

सूर्यलोकमवाप्नोत नात्र कार्य। विचारण।

The Devi Bhagavati becomes pleased with this and offers the lordship of the three Lokas to the devotee. The devotee, who offers daily the light of camphor to the Devi, goes to the Sūrya Loka. There is no doubt in this.

शतदीर्घास्तवा द्वात्सहस्वान्वा समाहितः ॥ 37 ॥

नैवेहं पुरातो देवतः स्वायपेत्यर्वताकृतिम् ।

लेश्रीक्षीवस्णो घेपै: पडूसैस्तु समाहितः ॥ 38 ॥

नानाकालिन विद्यानि स्वातूनि सर्वाति च ।

स्वर्णपार्थित्यताजीय द्वाद्वोष्टि निरंतरम् ॥ 39 ॥

With one's whole heart, one should give one hundred or one thousand lights to the Devi. The

devotee should offer heaps of food consisting of six Rāsas, the plates and dishes for chewing, sucking, licking and drinking, that is, all kinds of food solid, and liquid, mountain-like high. Always give food on golden flat plates and cups and various delicious sweet juicy nice heavenly fruits, nicely arranged on trays, cups and saucers.

तृप्तायां श्रीमहादेव्यां भवेतूनं जात्यम् ।

यतस्तदात्मकं सर्वे ज्तजी सर्वां यथा तथा ॥ 40 ॥

When Śrī Mahādevī Bhuvaneśvari gets pleased, the whole universe gets pleased. For the whole Universe is all Devi; as a rope is mistaken for a snake, so this Mahādevī is mistaken for the universe.

ततः पानीयकं द्वाद्धच्छर्भ गंगाजलं महत् ।

कर्पूरालासपुक्ते शीलतं कलापस्थितम् ॥ 41 ॥

ताम्बुरु च ततो देखे कर्पूराकलावितम् ।

एललवंगसंयुक्ते मुखसीर्णेध्यदायकम् ॥ 42 ॥

दद्याहेखे महाभकवा येन देखी प्रसिति ।

मूदंराणीगामुजदककादुर्दुषिन: स्वः ॥ 43 ॥

Offer a jar of drinking Ganges water, cool and nice, scented with camphor to the Devi; then offer betels with camphor, cardamum, cloves, and various delicious scents. These all are to be offered with great devotion so that the Devi may be pleased. Next have music with lovely mrdanagas, flutes, murajas, Dhakkās and dundubhis and so please Her.

तोषयेजनातं धार्यों गायवैरतिमोहनैः ।

वेदयारायणै: स्तोत्रै: पुराणादिभियन्ति ॥ 44 ॥

छत्र च चामरे डे द्वादोखे समाहितः ।

राजोपवारान्न आदीक्षे निव्यमेव समर्पयेत् ॥ 45 ॥

The Veda mantras are to be recited, the Purānas are to be read and the hymns to be chanted. With whole head and heart offer to the Devi the umbrella and cāmara, the two kingly offerings.

प्रदक्षिणां नमस्कारं कुयादिछ्या अनेकधा ।

क्षमायेवज्ञाप्त्राजीं जगदांबी घुतुमुँः ॥ 46 ॥

सकृत्यरणामात्रेण यत्र देवी प्रसिति ।

एताङ्गोपाचरिष्ट्र प्रसीदेद्र क: स्मय: ॥ 47 ॥

Book XI Chapter XVIII

Then circumambulate round Her and prostrate before Her and ask Her kindness and pray to Her to forgive all faults and shortcomings. The Devi is pleased with anybody who remembers Her even once!

स्वभावतो भवेन्माता पुत्रेस्तिकरणावति ।

तेन भत्तौ कृत्वात्ते तृ वक्त्व्यं किं ततः परम् ॥ 48 ॥

अत्र ते कथायिध्यामि पुरावृतं सनातनम् ।

ब्रहुद्धस्य राजर्षे: प्रियं भक्तिप्रदायकम् ॥ 49 ॥

What wonder then that She will be pleased with all these offerings! The Mother is naturally merciful to her child. When She is loved with devotion, then She becomes very merciful. There is nothing strange here! On this point I will recite to you the history of Vṛhadratha Rājarsī. Hearing which gives rise to Bhakti and Love.

घक्रकाको $ भवेत्यक्षी कवचिईहे हैमालये ।

धमत्रानचिध्यान्येणी काशीपुरं प्रति ॥ 50 ॥

अत्रपूर्णामहायनो प्रात्क्यशगते द्विजः ।

जगाम लील्या तत्र कणलोभादनाथवत् ॥ 51 ॥

Once in a certain region in the Himālayas there lived a bird called Cakravāk. It flew over many countries and went once to Kāśīdhāma. As a fruit of his Parārabdha Karma, that bird, desirous to find some rice beans, voluntarily went like an orphan round about the temple of Śrī Annapūrnā Devī.

कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणोकां जगाम स विहायसा ।

रेगार्तं विद्यवैय पुरी पुक्तिप्रदायिनीम् ॥ 52 ॥

कालोते ममारासी गतः स्वर्णपुरी प्रति ।

वुभुजे विष्यात्मवर्नि द्विष्णस्यधरो युवा ॥ 53 ॥

There circumambulating round the Devi Bhagavatī the bird left the city Kāśī, that grants liberation and flew away to another country. In time the bird left his body and went to Heavens. There he assumed a heavenly form of a youth and began to enjoy various pleasures.

कल्पूद्यं तथा भुक्ला पुनः प्राप भुवं प्रति ।

क्षत्रियाणी कुले जन्म प्राप सर्वोतनम् ॥ 54 ॥

बृह्मद्योति नानाभयूनसिद्धः विलीनपडले ।

महाव्यजा धार्मिकश्छ तस्ववादी जितेन्द्रियः ॥ 55 ॥

Thus he enjoyed for two Kalpas. Then he got back to the earth and took his birth as the best in the Kṣattriya family. He became celebrated as the king Brhadratha in this world. That King was truthful, controlled his senses, and practised Samyama and deep concentration and knew everything of the past, the present and the future.

यिकालजः सार्वभौमो ययो परपुरंवयः ।

पूर्वेजन्मसुत्तिस्त्य वर्तते दुलैभा भुवि ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रुत्वा किंवद्वर्ती मुनवः समुपगाताः ।

कृतातिथ्या नृपेरण शिष्टधेपुरेव ते ॥ 57 ॥

पप्रच्छूर्नवः सर्वे संशयो5त महान्प ।

केन पुण्यप्रभावेण पूर्वेजनम्युतितस्त व ॥ 58 ॥

He conquered all the enemies and performed various sacrifices and became the Emperor of the sea-girt earth and acquired the very rare faculty in the knowledge of everything of his previous births. The Munis came to know of this from various rumours and came to the King. The King Bhradhraha duly entertained those guests. The Munis took their seats and asked: "O King! We hear that all the events of previous births are vividly reflected in your memory.

त्रिकालानामेवीय कमात् पुण्यप्रभावतः ।

ज्ञानं तवेति तज्ञातुमगाततः स्म तवांतिकम् ॥ ५९ ॥

वद निथ्यांगवा वृत्ता तद्यामाकं यथातथम् ।

On this point great doubts have come upon us. Kindly describe in detail. By what Punyam (merits) you have come to know all about previous births and the knowledge of the past, the present and the future. We have come to you to know how you got this wonderful supersesunal knowledge. Kindly say to us sincerely everything about this and oblige."

श्रीनारायण उवाच

इति तेषां वचः शुत्वा राजा परमधार्मिकः ॥ 60 ॥

उवाच सकलं ब्रह्मशिकालजानकारणम् ।

श्रूयतां मुनयः सर्वे मम ज्ञानस्य कारणम् ॥ 61 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Brāhmaṇa! The very religious King Brāhadratha heard them and began to speak out all the secret causes for his

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

knowledge of the past, the present and the future, thus: O Munis! Hear how I acquired this knowledge.

चक्रवाकः स्थितः पूर्व नीच्योनिनतोर्धित वा ।

अज्ञानतोर्धि कृतावान्त्रपूर्णाद्रविभागम् ॥ 6 2  ॥

तेन पुण्यप्रभावेण स्वर्गं कल्युद्धास्थिति: ।

विकालज्ञानताज्यसिभपुज्ञन्नि सुझताः ॥ 6 3 ॥

In my previous birth I was a very low bird cakravāk. Once, out of my ignorance, I circumambulated round the temple of the Devi Bhagavatī Annapūrṇā at Kāśī. And, as the result of that, I lived in the Heavens for a period of two Kalpas and I have got this birth and I have got the knowledge of the past, the present and the future.

को वेद जगद्याव्या: पदमूर्तितकं कियत् ।

मृत्वा तन्महिमानं तु पत्नवश्यिधि मेठनिण् ॥ 6 4 ॥

शिर्भतु जन्म तेनां वै कृतलानां तु पाणिणग् ।

O You of good vows! Who can ascertain what amount of merits accrues from remembering the Feet of the World-Mother. Remembering Her glories, I always shed tears of joy. Those who do not worship the adorable Deity Jagadambā are the Great Sinners and they are treacherous. Fie on their births! The worship of Śiva or Viṣṇu is not eternal. वे सर्वेमातरं देवीं स्वोपासरां ने पनिति ति ॥ 65 ॥ न विधोपासना नित्या न विधुपासना तथा ।

नित्योपासित: परादेव्या नित्या शुत्वे चोदिता ॥ 66 ॥

कि मया बहु वक्तव्य स्थाने संशयर्जिते ।

सेवनीय पदोंभोजं भगवत्या निरंतरम् ॥ 67 ॥

Only the Jagadambā's worship is eternal. Thus it is stated in the Srutis. What more shall I speak on this worship of the World-Mother, which is void of the best trace of any doubt. Everyone ought to

serve devotedly the lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavatī. There is no other act more glorious in this world than serving the feet of Jagadambā.

नात: परतरं किंचिद्धिकं जगतीतले ।

सेवनीया परा देवी निर्गुणा सरुणा१४वा ॥ ६८ ॥

It is highly necessary to serve the Highest Deity, whether in Her Saguna or in Her Nirguna aspect. (Eat the sugarcandy, holding it in any way. It makes no difference.)

श्रीनारायण उवाच

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा राजर्ध्रांगिकस्य च ।

प्रसहद्वया: सर्वे गता: स्वस्यनिद्रितान् ॥ 69 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: Hearing the aforesaid words of the virtuous Rājarsi Bhradhrata, the Munis went back to their respective abodes.

एवंप्रभावा सा देवी तत्पूजाया: फलं क्रिकत् ।

अस्तीति च न प्रप्रख्यं चत्क्यं वा न केन्चित् ॥ 70 ॥

येघां तु जन्मसाफल्य तेघां श्रद्धा प्रजायते ।

येघां तु जन्मसांकर्य तेघां श्रद्धा न जायते ॥ 71 ॥

श्रित श्रीमद्दौभागवते महापुराणी एकादशरकन्नेपे-

श्रादोर्शधाय: 11 18 11

Such is the power of the Devi Jagadambikā! So who can question about the certainty of the high merits arising from the Jagadambikā's worship and who will not reply, when so questioned? Their births are really fruitful who possess faith in the Devi worship; but of those who have no such faith, there is some wrong mixture, no doubt; in their births.

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eleventh

Book on the greatness of the Devi Pājā, in the

Mahāpurānam Śrimadevibhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

