[Ch 9 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Parikṣit said: “When Muni Ruru went to his room to sleep, his mind having become perturbed with passion, his father Pramati seeing him sorrowful, asked him: “O Ruru! Why do you look so absent-minded?” Ruru was passionate then; so he said to his father:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Parīksit said :-- When the Muni Ruru went to his room to sleep, his mind having become perturbed with passion, his father Pramati seeing him sorrowful, asked him :-- “O Ruru! Why do you look so absent minded?” Ruru was passionate then; so he said to his father :--

[Ch 9 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I saw a girl named Pramadvarā in the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa; I wish that she might become my wife."
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “I saw a girl named Pramadvarā in the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa; I wish that she might become my wife.”

[Ch 9 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Pramati want immediately to the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa, and pleased him by various conversations and asked for his beautiful daughter when Sthūlakeśa promised that he would give her daughter in marriage on an auspicious day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Pramati went immediately to the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa, and pleased him by various conversations and asked for her beautiful daughter when Sthūlakeśa promised that he would give her daughter in marriage on an auspicious day.

[Ch 9 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then both the high-souled persons Pramati and Sthūlakeśa began to work in co-operation and make arrangements for marriage ceremony and collected various articles in that hermitage when the fair eyed girl Pramadvarā, while playing in the courtyard in the house, trod on a serpent and was bitten by it and consequently died.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then both the high-souled persons Pramati and Sthūlakeśa began to work in co-operation and make arrangements for marriage ceremony and collected various articles in that hermitage when the fair eyed girl Pramadvarā, while playing in the courtyard in the house, trod on a serpent and was bitten by it and consequently died.

[Ch 9 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing then Pramadarvā dead all the Munis of the place assembled and cried and wept with sorrowful hearts, when a great tumultuous uproar ensued.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing then Pramadvarā dead, all the Munis of the place assembled and cried and wept with sorrowful hearts, when a great tumultuous uproar ensued.

[Ch 9 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though the life departed from Pramadvara's body, yet seeing the brilliant lustre of her lifeless body lying on the ground, her nourisher and father Sthūlakaśa became very sorry and wept aloud.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though the life departed from Pramadvarā’s body, yet seeing the brilliant lustre of her lifeless body lying on the ground, her nourisher and father Sthūlakeśa became very sorry and wept aloud.

[Ch 9 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this cry of his, Ruru came there to see what had happened and perceived the girl, though lifeless, yet seeming alive and lying on the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this cry of his, Ruru came there to see what had happened and perceived the girl, though lifeless, yet seeming alive and lying on the ground.

[Ch 9 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "Seeing Sthūlākeśa and other Rṣis weeping, Ruru went out from that place and with a grievous heart, began to cry aloud. "Alas! Fate has certainly sent this serpent as the cause of all my miseries and to mar all my happiness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing Sthūlakeśa and other Risis weeping, Ruru went out from that place and with a grievous heart, began to cry aloud. “Alas! Fate has certainly sent this serpent as the cause of all my miseries and to mar all my happiness.

[Ch 9 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! What am I to do now? Where to go? When my beloved has fallen unto the jaws of death, I do not want to live any longer, bereft of my wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! What am I to do now? Where to go? When my beloved has fallen unto the jaws of death, I do not want to live any longer, bereft of my wife.

[Ch 9 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! What an unfortunate creature I am? I have not been able to embrace this beautiful darling of mine. I am deprived of kissing her face and marrying her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! What an unfortunate creature I am? I have not been able to embrace this beautiful darling of mine. I am deprived of kissing her face and marrying her.

[Ch 9 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Alas! Fie to my human birth! Let my life get out just now in as much as I could not, out of mere shame, throw myself on the burning pyre along with my beloved!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Alas! Fie to my human birth! Let my life get out just now in as much as I could not, out of mere shame, throw myself on the burning pyre along with my beloved!

[Ch 9 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! When death comes not to the sorrowful person, even when prayed for, how then can I expect divine happiness in this world?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! When death comes not to the sorrowful person, even when prayed for, how then can I expect divine happiness in this world?

[Ch 9 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So let me now drop myself down in a lake or enter into a burning fire or drink venom or strangle myself by tieing rope round my neck!"
NEW CORR ENG ──► So let me now drop myself down in a lake or enter in to a burning fire or drink venom or strangle myself by tieing rope round my neck!”

[Ch 9 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus Ruru wailed much on the bank of the river and long reflecting in his mind found out a way and thought what would be the advantage in death?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus Ruru wailed much on the bank of the river and long reflecting in his mind found out a way and thought what would be the advantage in death?

[Ch 9 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Rather an irretrievable sin would be incurred in committing suicide; and my father and mother would be sorry.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Rather an irretrievable sin would be iñcurred in committing suicide; and my father and mother would be sorry.

[Ch 9 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing me commit suicide, my bad luck and enemies will be gladdened; there is no manner of doubt in this. What benefit will my beloved gain if I commit suicide or if I be distressed for her bereavement.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing me commit suicide, my bad luck and enemies will be gladdened; there is no manner of doubt; in this. What benefit will my beloved gain if I commit suicide or if I be distressed for her bereavement.

[Ch 9 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Suppose I die, even then my beloved will not become mine in the next world, so there are many faults in my committing suicide but there is no fault if I preserve my life."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Suppose I die, even then my beloved will not become mine in the next world; so there are many faults in my committing suicide but there is no fault if I preserve my life.”

[Ch 9 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus coming to a conclusion Ruru bathed, performed Äcaman and became pure. He then took water in his hand and said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus coming to a conclusion Ruru bathed, performed Ācaman and became pure. He then took water in his hand and said :--

[Ch 9 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Whatever good works, worshipping the gods, etc., that I have done and if I have performed, with devotion, the service to my preceptors and teachers and superiors, homa cremonies, japam, tapasyā, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have rollected Gāyatrī and worshipped the Sun then let my beloved have life and get up as an outcome of my Punyam. If my beloved does not get back her life, I will certainly quit my life.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- “Whatever good works, worshipping the gods, etc., that I have done and if I have performed, with devotion, the service to my preceptors and teachers and superiors, homa ceremonies, Japam, tapasyā, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have recited Gāyatri and worshipped the Sun then let my beloved have life and get up as an outcome of my Puṇyam. If my beloved does not get back her life, I will certainly quit my life.”

[Ch 9 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, he worshipped the Devas mentally and threw that water of his hands on the ground. Thus Ruru, with a sorrowful heart was weeping.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, he worshipped the Devas mentally and threw that water of his hands on the ground. Thus Ruru, with a sorrowful heart, was weeping.

[Ch 9 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Deva's messenger came down and said: "O Brāhmīn! Don't make this bold attempt; how can your beloved get back her life? The life-period of this beautiful girl, born of Gandharva's sperm and Apsarā's ovum is now exhausted; now look for another beautiful woman.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Deva’s messenger came down and said :-- “O Brāhmaṇ! Don’t make this bold attempt; how can your beloved get back her life? The life-period of this beautiful girl, born of Gandharva’s sperm and Apsarā’s ovum is now exhausted; now look for another beautiful woman.

[Ch 9 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O one of very dull understanding! Why are you crying in vain? Where is the affection between you and this girl; she died in an unmarried state (without marrying you).”
NEW CORR ENG ──► O one of very dull understanding! Why are you crying in vain? Where is the affection between you and this girl; she died in an unmarried state (without marrying you).”

[Ch 9 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this Ruru said: O Deva messenger! I won't marry any other lady, whether my beloved gets back her life or does not get back her life; in case she does not regain her life, I will also forego my life at this instant."
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this Ruru said :-- “O Deva messenger! I won’t marry any other lady, whether my beloved gets back her life or does not get back her life; in case she does not regain this life, I will also forego my life at this instant.”

[Ch 9 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this greatest importunity of Ruru, the Deva messenger became glad and spoke the following truthful beneficent yet beautiful words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this greatest importunity of Ruru, the Deva messenger became glad and spoke the following truthful beneficent yet beautiful words :--

[Ch 9 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O Brāhim! I will suggest one way to you; kindly hear. The Devas ordained this long, long ago. You can give up your half life period, and with that you can make this girl alive soon.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Brāhmaṇa! I will suggest one way to you; kindly hear. The Devas ordained this long, long ago. You can give up your half life period, and with that you can make this girl alive soon.”

[Ch 9 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ruru said: “O Deva messenger! I give half my life-period to this girl; there is no doubt in this. Let my beloved get back her life soon and get up.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ruru said :-- “O Deva messenger! I give half my life-period to this girl; there is no doubt in this. Let my beloved get back her life soon and get up.”

[Ch 9 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King said: “O Ministers! At this time Viśvāvasu, knowing that his daughter Pramavārā is dead, descended from the Heavens in a celestial car and came to the place; then the Gandharva king and the Deva messenger both went to Yama,
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- O Ministers! At this time Visvāvasu, knowing that his daughter Pramadvarā is dead, descended from the Heavens in a celestial car and came to the place; then the Gandharva king and the Deva messenger both went to Yama,

[Ch 9 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dharmarāja, and spoke thus: “O Dharmarāja! This Viśvāvasu’s son was bitten by a snake and has now come to your place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► the Dharmarāj, and spoke thus :-- “O Dharmarāj! This Visvāvasu’s daughter Pramadvarā, the wife of Ruru, the Ṛṣiś son was bitten by a snake and has now come to your place.

[Ch 9 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Dvija Ruru is now desirous to quit his life; so, O Sun's son! Now let the girl again get her life through the influence of Ruru's brahmacarya (purity) as a consequence of his giving away his life period for the girl."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Dvija Ruru is now desirous to quit his life; so, O Sun’s son! Now let the girl again get her life through the influence of Ruru’s brahmacarya (purity) as a consequence of his giving away half his life period for the girl.”

[Ch 9 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Dharmarāja said: O Deva messenger! if you want to make the girl alive again, let her get life as a consequence of half the life-period of Ruru being subtracted. Go immediately and give the girl to Ruru."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Dharma said :-- “O Deva messenger! if you want to make the girl alive again, let her get life as a consequence of half the life-period of Ruru being subtracted. Go immediately and give the girl to Ruru.”

[Ch 9 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king said: “O Ministers! Yama having said thus to the Deva messenger, he went away immediately and made Pramadvara alive and handed her over to Ruru.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king said :-- “O Ministers! Yama having said thus to the Deva messenger, he went away immediately and made Pramadvarā alive and handed her over to Ruru.

[Ch 9 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, on an auspicious day, Ruru married her. Thus the Rşi's daughter Pramadvarā though fallen dead, got again her life by proper manas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, on an auspicious day, Ruru married her. Thus the Ṛṣiś daughter Pramadvarā though fallen dead, got again her life by proper means.

[Ch 9 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So, O Councillors! to save life, one should resort one's best duly according to the Śāstras, by the use of gems, mantras, and herbs and plants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So, O Councillors! to save life, one should resort one’s best duty according to the Śāstras, by the use of gems, mantras, and herbs and plants.”

[Ch 9 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus speaking to the ministers, King Parikshit had a fine building of seven floors in height erected, placed the principal guards around it and stationed also the most powerful men well versed in the knowledge of mani (gems), mantrams, and plants for protection and immediately ascended to this building.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus speaking to the ministers, the king Parīksit had a fine building of seven floors in height erected, placed the principal guards around it and stationed also the most powerful men well versed in the knowledge of mani (gems), mantrams, and plants for protection and immediately ascended to this building.

[Ch 9 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► To appease the wrath of the Muni Śrīgī, the king sent the Muni named Gaurmukha to him and requested him repeatedly “Let the crime of the humble devote be forgiven.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► To appease the wrath of the Muni Śriṅgī, the king sent the Muni named Gaurmukha to him and requested him repeatedly “Let the crime of the humble devotee be forgiven.”

[Ch 9 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then, for self preservation, the king brought from all sides the Brāhmins, who are perfect in their knowledge and application of the mantras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then, for self preservation, the king brought from all sides the Brāhmaṇas, who are perfect in their knowledge and application of the mantras.

[Ch 9 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The minister's son placed the elephants in proper places so that nobody could ascend to the top of the building; what more can be said than the fact that even air could not find entrance there when once ordered "no admission," what to speak of others! King Parikṣit remained there and counted the number of days of the serpent Takṣaka's coming there;
NEW CORR ENG ──► The minister’s son placed the elephants in proper places so that no body can ascend to the top of the building; what more can be said than the fact that even air could not find entrance there when once ordered “no admission” what to speak of others! The king Parīksit remained there and counted the number of days of the serpent Takṣaka’s coming there;

[Ch 9 Verse 47-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He performed his bath, Sandhyā Vandamans and fooding; even he consulted with his ministers and governed his kingdom from there. O Rjsis! At this time a Brāhmin named Kaśyapa, versed in the mantras, heard of the curse of the king and thought that he would get abundant wealth if he could free the king from Takṣaka's poison and proposed to himself that he would go to the place where the cursed king Parikṣit was staying with the Brāhmin. Pondering thus, the Brāhmin went out of his house, on the expectation of wealth from the king. Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the Second Book on the account of Ruru in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► he performed his bath, Sandhyā Bandanams and fooding; even he consulted with his ministers and governed his kingdom from there. O Ṛṣis! At this time a Brāhmaṇ named Kaśyapa, versed in the mantras, heard of the curse of the king and thought that he would get abundant wealth if he could free the king from Takṣaka’s poison and proposed to himself that he would go to the place where the cursed king Parīksit was staying with the Brāhmaṇas. Pondering thus, the Brāhmaṇa went out of his house, on the expectation of wealth from the king. Thus ends the ninth chapter of the second Skandha on the account of Ruru in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.
