CHAPTER IX

On the Account of Kuru

परीक्षिवाच

कामात़ः स पुनिर्वाला रूकः सुचो निजाध्मे ।

चिता पपछ्छ दीनं तं किं करो चियना असि ॥ १ ॥

Parikṣit said: “When Muni Ruru went to his room to sleep, his mind having become perturbed with passion, his father Pramati seeing him sorrowful, asked him: “O Ruru! Why do you look so absent-minded?” Ruru was passionate then; so he said to his father:

स तमाहातिकामातः स्थूलकेश्य चाङ्गेम ।

कन्या प्रमद्धता नाता सा मे भार्यां भवेदिति ॥ 2 ॥

"I saw a girl named Pramadvarā in the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa; I wish that she might become my wife."

स गाला प्रमतिस्तूर्ण स्थूलकों महापुन्तिम् ।

प्रमुहा सुमुखं कृलाय ययाचे तां वरानान्मा ॥ 3 ॥

दूदी वाचं स्थूलकेशः प्रवास्यामि गुर्भेजृति ।

विद्याहर्षं च सम्भारं रचयामासुरुंने ॥ 4 ॥

Hearing this, Pramati want immediately to the hermitage of Sthūlakeśa, and pleased him by various conversations and asked for his beautiful daughter when Sthūlakeśa promised that he would give her daughter in marriage on an auspicious day.

प्रमति स्थूलकेशश विद्याहार्थं समुर्धाती ।

वध्वतुम्हाल्मानो समीपस्थो तपोवेने ॥ 5 ॥

तम्मिचवसेरे कन्या समागण गृहांगणे ।

प्रसूर्ण पत्रगं पादोनास्यूषचाक्लोचना ॥ 6 ॥

Then both the high-souled persons Pramati and Sthūlakeśa began to work in co-operation and make arrangements for marriage ceremony and collected

various articles in that hermitage when the fair eyed girl Pramadvarā, while playing in the courtyard in the house, trod on a serpent and was bitten by it and consequently died.

दहा तु पत्रोनाथ सा ममार वर्गाना ।

कोलाहलसदा जातो मृतां द्रव्हा प्रमढ़ारम् ॥ 7 ॥

मिलिता मुनवः सर्वे चुकृष्णे: शोकसंयुतः ।

भूमी तां पतितां द्रश्वा लिता तस्यातिबृघितः ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing then Pramadarvā dead all the Munis of the place assembled and cried and wept with sorrowful hearts, when a great tumultuous uproar ensued.

रोहे वित्तग्राणां दीयमानां सुतेजसा ।

रूँ क्षुत्वा तदाबंदन्नार्थां समागतः ॥ 9 ॥

द्वर्षा पतितां तत्र सजीवामिव कामिनीम् ।

रहंतं स्थलकेशं च दृष्याउ्यान्घिसत्नाम् ॥ 10 ॥

Though the life departed from Pramadvara's body, yet seeing the brilliant lustre of her lifeless body lying on the ground, her nourisher and father Sthūlakaśa became very sorry and wept aloud.

रूकः स्थानाडहितां रूगोद विहहाकुलः ।

अहो दैवेन सर्पोर्धा प्रेपितः परमाढ़तः ॥ १ १ ॥

Hearing this cry of his, Ruru came there to see what had happened and perceived the girl, though lifeless, yet seeming alive and lying on the ground.

मम गर्भविधाताय दुःखतेत्रुयं किल ।

कि कंलीपि कव पाच्धामि मृत्ता मे प्राणवल्लभा ॥ 1 2 ॥

"Seeing Sthūlākeśa and other Rṣis weeping, Ruru went out from that place and with a grievous heart, began to cry aloud. "Alas! Fate has certainly

sent this serpent as the cause of all my miseries and to mar all my happiness.

न कै बीकितुिच्छामि विवृतकः प्रियवासनव।।

नार्लिंगिता वरात्रोहा न मया चूचिता मुखौ ॥ १३ ॥

Alas! What am I to do now? Where to go? When my beloved has fallen unto the jaws of death, I do not want to live any longer, bereft of my wife.

न पाणिग्रह प्राप्तं मन्दभायेन सर्वथा ।

ताजाहोमतशा चानी न कृतस्वल्या सह ॥ 14 ॥

Oh! What an unfortunate creature I am? I have not been able to embrace this beautiful darling of mine. I am deprived of kissing her face and marrying her.

मानुधं विमिरं कामं गच्छल्वच मामसवः ।

दुःखित्यन व चा मृत्युविधितः सम्पैति हि ॥ 15 ॥

Alas! Fie to my human birth! Let my life get out just now in as much as I could not, out of mere shame, throw myself on the burning pyre along with my beloved!

सुवर्द ताई कयं दिव्यमायते भुवि वाज्छितम् ।

प्रपतिम हृदे पोरे पावके प्रपताम्यम् ॥ १ ६ ॥

Oh! When death comes not to the sorrowful person, even when prayed for, how then can I expect divine happiness in this world?

विषयमिधि गले पार्शं कृता प्राणार्थत्वाज्यमृहम् ।

वित्तपैवं कस्तत्र विचार्यं मत्सा पुनः ॥ 17 ॥

So let me now drop myself down in a lake or enter into a burning fire or drink venom or strangle myself by tieing rope round my neck!"

उपारं चित्तयामास स्थितस्तमिषमदीते ।

भरणार्षिक फलं मे स्यादात्मह्या दुतुय्वा ॥ 18 ॥

Thus Ruru wailed much on the bank of the river and long reflecting in his mind found out a way and thought what would be the advantage in death?

दू:खितशुधितामेथाजजननी चातितूःखिता ।

देवसुतो घबेलकामं दूयदा मां त्यक्जीक्षितम् ॥ 19 ॥

“Rather an irretrievable sin would be incurred in committing suicide; and my father and mother would be sorry.

सर्वे: प्रमृत्तिक्ष स्यात्मस्थेनात्र संशय: ।

उपकात: प्रियाया: कः परलोके भवेदीय ॥ 20 ॥

Seeing me commit suicide, my bad luck and enemies will be gladdened; there is no manner of doubt in this. What benefit will my beloved gain if I commit suicide or if I be distressed for her bereavement.

मृते मयात्मायतेन विहार्यापिडतेर्पि च ।

परलोक प्रिया साजपि न मे स्यादात्मयातिनः ॥ 21 ॥

Suppose I die, even then my beloved will not become mine in the next world, so there are many faults in my committing suicide but there is no fault if I preserve my life."

एतदर्थं मृते दोषा मयि नैवाग्ये पुनः ।

विष्यवैधकस्तत्रनालासप्रत्यमृषिव: सित्तः ॥ 22 ॥

Thus coming to a conclusion Ruru bathed, performed Äcaman and became pure. He then took water in his hand and said:

अवबीद्धिचनं कृत्वा जलं पाणावसी मुनि: ।

यन्मया सुकृतं किंचित्कृतं देवाचनांतिकम् ॥ 23 ॥

गुरव: पूजिता भवसा हुतं जलं पत: कृतम् ।

अधीतात्यलिजाल वेदा गायजी संकृत्या यदि ॥ 24 ॥

रविरागधितसंतने संजीवतु मम प्रिया ।

यदि जीवेज मे कान्ता न्यसे प्राणानहं ततः ॥ 25 ॥

“Whatever good works, worshipping the gods, etc., that I have done and if I have performed, with devotion, the service to my preceptors and teachers and superiors, homa cremonies, japam, tapasyā, if I have studied all the Vedas and if I have rollected Gāyatrī and worshipped the Sun then let my beloved have life and get up as an outcome of my Punyam. If my beloved does not get back her life, I will certainly quit my life.

राजोबाच

इन्युक्त्वा तज्जलं भुभी चिक्षेपाराध्य देवतः ।

एवं विलपतन्तस्य भायोदा दुःवित्तस्य च ॥ 26 ॥

देवदूतस्तादोःप्येत्य वाक्यमाह कर्न ततः ।

Thus saying, he worshipped the Devas mentally and threw that water of his hands on the ground. Thus Ruru, with a sorrowful heart was weeping.

देवदृत उवाच

माकार्णी: साहसं बहान् कबं जीवेन्मृता प्रिया ॥ 27 ॥

गतानुघीया सुश्रोगी गान्यवीयससोः सुता ।

The Deva's messenger came down and said: "O Brāhmīn! Don't make this bold attempt; how can your beloved get back her life? The life-period of this beautiful girl, born of Gandharva's sperm and Apsarā's ovum is now exhausted; now look for another beautiful woman.

अन्यां कामय चार्वर्गी मुतेयं चाचिवाहिता ॥ 28 ॥

किं तोदिसि सुदुर्दुळे का ग्रीतिस्तेज्ञसा सह ।

O one of very dull understanding! Why are you crying in vain? Where is the affection between you and this girl; she died in an unmarried state (without marrying you).”

रूसाचा

देववृत न चान्यां वै वरिष्यामदम्बूनान् ॥ 29 ॥

यदि जीवेत्र जीवेत्रा मतैंल्य चाधुना मया ।

At this Ruru said: O Deva messenger! I won't marry any other lady, whether my beloved gets back her life or does not get back her life; in case she does not regain her life, I will also forego my life at this instant."

राजोवाच

विद्वेषिति हठं तस्य देवदूतो सुवात्यिनः ॥ 30 ॥

उवाच वचनं तल्यं सत्यं चातिमनोहाम ।

At this greatest importunity of Ruru, the Deva messenger became glad and spoke the following truthful beneficent yet beautiful words.

उपारं श्रणु विग्रें द्विक्तिं यनसुरैः पुरा ॥ 31 ॥

आयुषो5धप्रयोने जीवयातु प्रमद्वारा ।

“O Brāhim! I will suggest one way to you; kindly hear. The Devas ordained this long, long ago. You can give up your half life period, and with that you can make this girl alive soon.”

रूसाच

आयुषो5ध प्रयळामि कन्याये नार संशयः ॥ 32 ॥

अष्ट प्रत्यावृतगाण प्रोतिष्ठु मम प्रिया ।

Ruru said: “O Deva messenger! I give half my life-period to this girl; there is no doubt in this. Let my beloved get back her life soon and get up.”

विश्वासुस्तत तत्र विमानेन समगतः ॥ 33 ॥

जात्या पुर्वी भूतां चाशु खर्गोलाकाम्यानु।

ततो नान्यराजश देववृतश सतभः ॥ 34 ॥

The King said: “O Ministers! At this time Viśvāvasu, knowing that his daughter Pramavārā is dead, descended from the Heavens in a celestial car and came to the place; then the Gandharva king and the Deva messenger both went to Yama,

धर्मार्जुपरैवं वचनं प्रत्यभाषतम् ।

धर्मारक रो: पनी सुता विश्वासोस्तथा ॥ 35 ॥

The Dharmarāja, and spoke thus: “O Dharmarāja! This Viśvāvasu’s son was bitten by a snake and has now come to your place.

सूता प्रमद्धा कन्या दहा सर्पेन धान्यान ।

सा करोरायुषोर्धेन मतुकामस्य सुर्यैन ॥ 36 ॥

समुप्तिष्ठु तन्त्यीं जतचयीप्रभावतः ।

The Dvija Ruru is now desirous to quit his life; so, O Sun's son! Now let the girl again get her life through the influence of Ruru's brahmacarya (purity) as a consequence of his giving away his life period for the girl."

धर्म उवाच

विश्वासुसुतां कन्यां देवेवुत यदीच्छिस ॥ 37 ॥

उत्तिष्वाव्योर्धन रूक नाचा त्वमयोग ।

Dharmarāja said: O Deva messenger! if you want to make the girl alive again, let her get life as a consequence of half the life-period of Ruru being subtracted. Go immediately and give the girl to Ruru."

राजोबाच

एवमुक्तस्तो गत्वा जीवियत्वा प्रमुदाग् ॥ 38 ॥

रुतेः समयेयामास देवदुतस्त्वाग्वितः ।

The king said: “O Ministers! Yama having said thus to the Deva messenger, he went away immediately and made Pramadvara alive and handed her over to Ruru.

ततः शुभेड़िं विधिना रूरणापि विवाहिता ॥ 39 ॥

इन्द्र वंघायवोनेन मृत्यपूजीविता तदा ।

Thus, on an auspicious day, Ruru married her. Thus the Rşi's daughter Pramadvarā though fallen dead, got again her life by proper manas.

उपायस्तु प्रकतैल्य सर्वेश शास्त्रसंमत ॥ ४० ॥

मागमन्नोषधीमिश्र विन्धित्यग्राषणे ।

So, O Councillors! to save life, one should resort one's best duly according to the Śāstras, by the use of gems, mantras, and herbs and plants.

इत्युक्ना सचिवाज्ञा कल्यविता सुरक्षकाः ॥ 41 ॥

कारवित्यासथ प्रासादं सतधूमिकमुतामम् ।

आरकोहोतास्तुः सचिवः सह तत्णगम् ॥ 42 ॥

Thus speaking to the ministers, King Parikshit had a fine building of seven floors in height erected, placed the principal guards around it and stationed also the most powerful men well versed in the knowledge of mani (gems), mantrams, and plants for protection and immediately ascended to this building.

मीमान्धरधरा: शुरा: स्थापितास्त्र तशणे ।

प्रेयामास भूपालो मुनिं गौरामुं ततः ॥ 43 ॥

To appease the wrath of the Muni Śrīgī, the king sent the Muni named Gaurmukha to him and requested him repeatedly “Let the crime of the humble devote be forgiven.”

प्रसादार्थे सेवकस्य क्षमवेति पुनः पुनः ।

बाहाणासिद्यमन्नाजारक्षणार्थितस्ततः ॥ 44 ॥

Then, for self preservation, the king brought from all sides the Brāhmins, who are perfect in their knowledge and application of the mantras.

मन्पिक्ष: स्थितस्तत्र स्थाययामास: द्वित्नः ।

न काश्रिदास्हेत्र प्रासादे चातिरिक्षते ॥ 45 ॥

वातोर्पि न चेरन्त्र प्रवेशे विनिवार्यते ।

भध्यभोज्यादिकं राजा तत्स्थश्छ चकार सः ॥ 46 ॥

The minister's son placed the elephants in proper places so that nobody could ascend to the top of the building; what more can be said than the fact that even air could not find entrance there when once ordered "no admission," what to speak of others! King Parikṣit remained there and counted the number of days of the serpent Takṣaka's coming there;

स्नानसन्थ्यादिकं कर्म तत्रेव विनिवल्चं च ।

राजाकर्मणि सर्वाणि ततस्थाकारीयुः ॥ 47 ॥

मन्त्रिभि: सह संभंत्र यणायन्दिवसानपि ।

क्रक्षच्छ करणयो नाम ब्राहणो मन्ससम् ॥ 48 ॥

शुश्राव च तथा शापं प्राप्त राजा महात्मना ।

स धनार्थी दिजश्रेषः करणयः समर्पित्यत् ॥ 49 ॥

ब्रजामि तन यत्रास्ते शण्तो राजा दिजेन है ।

इति कृत्वा मर्ति विधः स्वगृहासि:सुतः पथि ॥ 50 ॥

करणयो मन्त्रविद्धान्यार्थी मुनिसत्तम: ।

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे द्वितीयकल्पे

नवनोउधाय: 11 9 11

He performed his bath, Sandhyā Vandamans and fooding; even he consulted with his ministers and governed his kingdom from there. O Rjsis! At this time a Brāhmin named Kaśyapa, versed in the mantras, heard of the curse of the king and thought that he would get abundant wealth if he could free the king from Takṣaka's poison and proposed to himself that he would go to the place where the cursed king Parikṣit was staying with the Brāhmin. Pondering thus, the Brāhmin went out of his house, on the expectation of wealth from the king.

Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of the Second Book on the account of Ruru in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses.

