[Ch 15 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: Only the twice born are to take this Tripuṇḍra on the forehead and the other parts of the body after carefully purifying the ashes by the mantra Agniriti Bhasma, etc. The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, and Vaśīyas are known as the twice-born, (the Dvijas). So the Dvijas ought to take daily this Tripuṇḍra with great care.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Only the twice born are to take this Tripuṇḍra on the forehead and the other parts of the body after carefully purifying the ashes by the mantra Agniriti Bhasma, etc. The Brāhmaṇs, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas are known as the twiceborn, (the Dvījas). So the Dvījas ought to take daily this Tripuṇḍra with great care.

[Ch 15 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! Those who are purified with the ceremony of the holy thread, are called the Dvijas. For these the taking of Tripundra as per Śruti is very necessary. Without taking this Vibhūti, any good work done is as it were not done. There is no doubt in this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Brāhmaṇa! Those who are purified with the ceremony of the holy thread, are called the Dvījas. For these the taking of Tripuṇḍra as per Śruti is very necessary. Without taking this Vibhūti, any good work done is as it were not done. There is no doubt in this.

[Ch 15 Verse 5-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Even the japan of Gayatri is the most important and the chief thing of the Brāhmaṇahood. But that is not advised if the Tripuṇḍra be not taken. O Munis! As long as the ashes born of Agni are not applied on the forehead, one is not entitled to be initiated in the Gayatri Śamta. O Brāhmaṇa! Unless ashes he applied on the forehead, no one will recognise you as a Brāhmaṇa. For this reason I take this holding of the merit-giving Tripuṇḍra as the cause of the Brāhmaṇahood.
NEW CORR ENG ──► of Munis! The Gāyatrī is the most important and the chief thing of the Brāhmaṇhood. But that is not advised if the Tripuṇḍra be not taken. O Munis! As long as the ashes born of Agni are not applied on the forehead, one is not entitled to be initiated in the Gāyatrī Mantra. O Brāhmaṇ! Unless ashes be applied on the forehead, no one will recognise you as a Brāhmaṇa. For this reason I take this holding of the merit-giving Tripuṇḍra as the cause of the Brāhmaṇhood.

[Ch 15 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I speak this verily unto you, that he is recognised as a Brāhmaṇa and literary on whose forehead there is seen the white ashes purified by the mantra. He is entitled to the state of a Brāhmaṇa who is naturally very eager to collect the ashes as he collect the invaluable gems and jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I speak this verily unto you, that he is recognised as a Brāhmaṇa and literary on whose forehead there is seen the white ashes purified by the mantra. He is entitled to the state of a Brāhmaṇa who is naturally very eager to collect the ashes as he collects the invaluable gems and jewels.

[Ch 15 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are not naturally eager to collect the Bhasma as they are naturally eager to collect gems and jewels, are to be known as Cāndālas in some of their previous births. Those who are not naturally joyous in holding Trippundra, were verily Cāndālas in their previous births. This I tell you truly very truly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are not naturally eager to collect the Bhasma as they are naturally eager to collect gems and jewel, are to be known as Cāṇḍālas in some of their previous births. Those who are not naturally joyous in holding Tripuṇḍra, were verily Cāṇḍālas in their previous births; this I tell you truly very truly.

[Ch 15 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who eat roots and fruits without holding ashes go to the terrible hells. “He who worships Śiva without having Bibhūti on his forehead, that wretch is a Śiva hater and goes to hell after his death. He who does not hold Vibhūti is not entitled to any religious act." Without taking Vibhūti, if you make a gift of Tulā Puruṣa made of gold, you won't get any fruits. Rather you will have to go to hell!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who eat roots and fruits without holding ashes go to the terrible hells. He who worships Śiva without having Bibhūti on his forehead, that wretch is a Śiva hater and goes to hell after his death. He who does not hold Bibhūti is not entitled to any religious act. Without taking Bibhūti, if you make a gift of Tulā Puruṣa made of gold, you won’t get any fruits. Rather you will have to go to hell!

[Ch 15 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the Brāhmaṇas are not to perform their Sandhyās without their holy threads, so without this Vibhūti, one ought not also to perform one's Sandhyā. If at times a man by chance has no holy thread, he can do his Sandhyā by muttering the Gāyatrī or by fasting. But there is no such rule in holding Bhasma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the Brāhmaṇas are not to perform their Sandhyās without their holy threads, so without this Bibhūti, one ought not also to perform one’s Sandhyā. If at times a man by chance has no holy thread, he can do his Sandhyā by muttering the Gāyatrī or by fasting. But there is no such rule in holding Bhasma.

[Ch 15 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If one performs Sandhyā, without having any Vibhūti, he is liable to incur a sin; as without holding this Bhasma, no right can come to him to perform his Sandhyā. As a man of lowest caste acts contrary and incurs a sin if he hears the Veda mantra, so a twice-born incurs a sin if he performs Sandhyā without having his Tripuṇḍra.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If one performs Sandhyā, without having any Bibhūti, he is liable to iñcur a sin; as without holding this Bhasma, no right can come to him to perform his Sandhyā. As a man of a lowest caste acts contrary and iñcurs a sin if he hears the Veda mantra, so a twice-born iñcurs a sin if he performs Sandhyā without having his Tripuṇḍra.

[Ch 15 Verse 19-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The twiceborn must therefore collect his thoughts with his heart intent on this Tripuṇḍra whether it be according to Śrauta or Smārta method—or in absence thereof the Laukika Bhasma. Of whatsoever sort is the Bhasma, it is always pure. In the Sandhyā and other actions of worship, the twiceborn ought to be very careful and punctilious in using this Bhasma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The twiceborn must therefore collect his thoughts with his heart intent on this Tripuṇḍra whether it be according to Śrauta or Smārta method; or in absence thereof the Laukika Bhasma. Of whatsoever sort is the Bhasma, it is always pure. In the Sandhyā and other actions of worship, the twiceborn ought to be very careful and punctilious in using this Bhasma.

[Ch 15 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No sin can enter into the body of one besmeared with ashes. For this reason, the Brāhmanas ought always to use ashes with great care. One is to hold the Tripunāra, six Angulas high or greater by the fore, middle and ring fingers of the right hand
NEW CORR ENG ──► No sin can enter into the body of one besmeared with ashes. For this reason, the Brāhmaṇas ought always to use ashes with great care. One is to hold the Tripuṇḍra, six Angulas high or greater by the fore, middle and ring fingers of the right hand.

[Ch 15 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If any body uses Tripundra, shining and brilliant, and extending from eye to eye, he becomes, no doubt, a Rudra. The ring-finger is the letter “A,” the middle finger is “U” and the forefinger is “M”; so the Tripundra marks drawn by the above three fingers is of the nature of the three gunas. The Tripundra should be drawn by the middle, fore, and ring fingers in a reverse way (from the left of the forehead to its right).
NEW CORR ENG ──► If anybody uses Tripuṇḍra, shining and brilliant, and extending from eye to eye, he becomes, no doubt, a Rudra. The ring-finger is the letter “A,” the middle finger is “U” and the forefinger is “M”; so the Tripuṇḍra marks drawn by the above three fingers is of the nature of the three guṇas. The Tripuṇḍra should be drawn by the middle, fore, and ring fingers in a reverse way (from the left of the forehead to its right).

[Ch 15 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I will now tell you an anecdote, very ancient. Listen. Once Durvāsā, the head of the ascetics, with his body besmeared with ashes and with Rudrāksam, all over, on his body went to the region of the Pits, uttering loudly “O Śaṅkara, of the Form of All! O Śiva! O Mother Jagadambe, the Source of all auspiciousness!
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will now tell you an anecdote, very ancient. Listen. Once Durvāsā, the head of the ascetics, with his body besmeared with ashes and with Rudrāksam, all over, on his body went to the region of the Pitris, uttering loudly, “O Śaṅkara, of the Form of All! O Śiva! O Mother Jagadambe, the Source of all auspiciousness!”

[Ch 15 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Pitrs Kavya-Vālās, etc., (Kavya Vālanalāh Somah Yamah scaivāryamā Tathā, Agnisvāttvā, Varhisādaḥ, Somapāh Pitr Devatāh) got up, received him heartily and gave him seats and shewed him great honours and respect and held many pure conversations with the Muni.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Pitris Kavya-Vālās, etc., (Kavya Vālanalaḥ Somaḥ Yamaḥ scaivāryamā Tathā, Agnisvāttvā, Varhisadaḥ, Somapāḥ Pitri Devatāh) got up, received him heartily and gave him seats and shewed him great honours and respect and held many pure conversations with the Muni.

[Ch 15 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► During their talk, the sinners of the Kumbhipāka hell were crying “Oh! Alas! We are killed, we are being killed” Oh! We are being burnt; some others cried “Oh! Oh! We are cut down.” Thus various cries and lamentations reached their ears.
NEW CORR ENG ──► During their talk, the sinners of the Kumbhīpāka hell were crying, “Oh! Alas! We are killed, we are being killed. Oh! We are being burnt!” some others cried, “Oh! Oh! We are cut down.” Thus various cries and lamentations reached their ears.

[Ch 15 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing their piteous cries, Durvāṣā, the prince of the Rṣis, asked with a grievous heart the Pitts, "Who are those crying?" The Pitts replied: There is a city close to our place called "Samyamani Purā" of the King Yama where the sinners are punished. Yama gives punishment to the sinners there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing their piteous cries, Durvāsā, the prince of the Ṛṣis, asked with a grievous heart the Pitris, “Who are those crying?” The Pitris replied :-- There is a city close to our place called “Samyamanī Purī” of the King Yama where the sinners are punished. Yama gives punishment to the sinners there.

[Ch 15 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Sinless One! In that city the King Yama lives with his terrible black-coloured messengers, the personifications of Kāla (the Destruction). For the punishment of the sinners, eighty-six hells exist there. The place is being guarded always by the horrible messengers of Yama.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Sinless One! In that city the King Yama lives with his terrible black-coloured messengers, the personifications of Kāla (the Destruction). For the punishment of the sinners, eighty-six hells exist there. The place is being guarded always by the horrible messengers of Yama.

[Ch 15 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Out of those hells, the hell named Kumbhipāka is very big and that is the chief of the hells. The ailings and torments of the sinners in the Kumbhipāka hell cannot be described in hundred years. O Muni! The Śiva-haters, the Viṣṇu-haters, the Devi haters are made to fall to this Kunḍa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Out of those hells, the hell named Kumbhīpāka is very big and that is the chief of the hells. The ailings and torments of the sinners in the Kumbhīpāka hell cannot be described in hundred years. O Muni! The Śiva-haters, the Viṣṇu-haters, the Devī-haters are made to fall to this Kuṇḍa.

[Ch 15 Verse 38-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who find fault with the Vedas, and blame the Sun, Ganeśa and tyrannise the Brāhmanas fall down to this hell. Those who blame their mothers, fathers, Gurus, elder brothers, the Smṛtis and Purāṇas and those as well who take the Tapta Mudrās (hot marks on their bodies) and Tapta Śūlas (i.e., those who being Śaivas act as they like) those who blame the religion (Dharma) go down to that hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who find fault with the Vedas, and blame the Sun, Gaṇeśa and tyrannise the Brāhmaṇas fall down to this hell. Those who blame their mothers, fathers, Gurus, elder brothers, the Smritis and Purāṇas and those as well who take the Tapta Mudrās (hot marks on their bodies) and Tapta Śūlas (i.e., those who being Śaivas act as they like) those who blame the religion (Dharma) go down to that hell.

[Ch 15 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► We hear constantly their loud piteous cries, very painful to hear; hearing which naturally gives rise to feelings of indifference (Vairāgyam). Hearing the above words of the Pitṛs, Durvāsā, the prince of the Munis, went to the hell to see the sinners.
NEW CORR ENG ──► We hear constantly their loud piteous cries, very painful to hear; hearing which naturally gives rise to feelings of indifference (Vairāgyam). Hearing the above words of the Pitris, Durvāsā, the prince of the Munis, went to the hell to see the sinners.

[Ch 15 Verse 43-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Going there, the Muni bent his head downwards and saw the sinners when, instantly the sinners began to enjoy pleasures more than those who enjoy in the Heavens. The sinners became exceedingly glad. Some began to sing, some began to dance, some began to laugh; some sinners began to play one with one another in great ecstasy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Going there, the Muni bent his head downwards and saw the sinners when, instantly the sinners began to enjoy pleasures more than those who enjoy in the Heavens. The sinners became exceedingly glad. Some began to sing, some began to dance, some began to laugh; some sinners began to play one with one another in great ecstasy.

[Ch 15 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The musical instruments Mrḍanga, Muraja, lute, Dhakkā, Dundubhis, etc., resounded with sweet sonorous tones (in accordance with five resonants). The sweet fragrant smell of the flowers of Vāsanti creepers spread all round. Durvāsā Muni became surprised to see all this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The musical instruments Mridaṅga, Muraja, lute, Dhakkā, Dundubhis, etc., resounded with sweet sonorous tones (in accordance with five resonants). The sweet fragrant smell of the flowers of Vāsanti creepers spread all round. Durvāsā Muni became surprised to see all this.

[Ch 15 Verse 47-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Bibhu! How can this take place! We cannot make out the cause of this. O Deva! We all have become terrified and have come to you." Hearing the words of the messengers, Dharmarāja, mounting on his great buffalo, came there instantly and seeing the state of the sinners sent news immediately to the Heavens.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Bibhu! How can this take place! We cannot make out the cause of this. O Deva! We all have become terrified and have come to you.” Hearing the words of the messengers, Dharmarāja, mounting on his great buffalo, came there instantly and seeing the state of the sinners sent news immediately to the Heavens.

[Ch 15 Verse 51-52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing the news Indra came there with all the Devas, Brahmā came there from His Brahmaloka; and Nārāyaṇa came there from Vaikunṭha. Hearing this, the regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas came there with all their attendants from their respective abodes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing the news Indra came there with all the Devas, Brahmā came there from His Brahmaloka; and Nārāyaṇa came there from Vaikuṇṭha. Hearing this, the regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas came there with all their attendants from their respective abodes.

[Ch 15 Verse 53-54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They all came there to the Kumbhipāka hell and saw that all the beings there are enjoying greater pleasures than those in the Heavens. They all were astonished to see this; and they could not make out why this had happened. “What a wonder is this! This Kunda has been built for the punishment of the sinners.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They all came there to the Kumbhīpāka hell and saw that all the beings there are enjoying greater pleasures than those in the Heavens. They all were astonished to see this; and they could not make out why this had happened. “What a wonder is this! This Kuṇḍa has been built for the punishment of the sinners.

[Ch 15 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When such a pleasure is now being felt here, the people won't fear anything henceforth to commit sins. Why is this order of the Vedas created by God reversed? Why has God undone His own doing? What a wonder is this! Now a great miracle is before our sight." Thus speaking, they remained at a fix.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When such a pleasure is now being felt here, the people won’t fear anything henceforth to commit sins. Why is this order of the Vedas created by God reversed? Why has God undone His own doing? What a wonder is this! Now a great miracle is before our sight.” Thus speaking, they remained at a fix.

[Ch 15 Verse 57-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They could not make out the cause of this. In the meanwhile Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa after consulting with the other Devas went with some Devas to the abode of Śaṅkara in Kailāśa. They saw there that Śrī Bhagavān Śaṅkara (with crescent of the Moon on His forehead) was playing there attended always by the Pramathas and adorned with various ornaments like a youth, sixteen years old. His parts of the body were very beautiful as if the mine of loveliness.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They could not make out the cause of this. In the meanwhile Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa after consulting with the other Devas went with some Devas to the abode of Śaṅkara in Kailāśa. They saw there that Śrī Bhagavān Śaṅkara (with crescent of the Moon on His forehead) was playing there attended always by the Pramathas and adorned with various ornaments like a youth, sixteen years old. His parts of the body were very beautiful as if the mine of loveliness.

[Ch 15 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was conversing on various delightful subjects with His consort Pārvātī and pleasing Her mind. The four Vedas were there personified. Seeing Him, Nārāyaṇa bowed down and informed him clearly of all the wonderful events. He said:
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was conversing on various delightful subjects with His consort Pārvatī and pleasing Her mind. The four Vedas were there personified. Seeing Him, Nārāyaṇa bowed down and informed him clearly of all the wonderful events. He said :--

[Ch 15 Verse 61-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "O Deva! What is the cause of all this? We cannot make out anything! O Lord! Thou art omniscient. Thou knowest everything. So kindly mention how is this brought about!" Hearing Viṣṇu's words, Bhagavān Śaṅkara spoke graciously in sweet words, grave as the rumbling of a rain-cloud: "O Viṣṇu! Hear the cause of this. What wonder is there? This is all due to the greatness of Bhasma (ashes)!
NEW CORR ENG ──► “O Deva! What is the cause of all this? We cannot make out anything! O Lord! Thou art omniscient. Thou knowest everything. So kindly mention how is this brought about!” Hearing Viṣṇu’s words. Bhagavān Śaṅkara spoke graciously in sweet words, grave as the rumbling of a rain-cloud :-- “O Viṣṇu! Hear the cause of this. What wonder is there? This is all due to the greatness of Bhasma (ashes)!

[Ch 15 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What cannot be brought about by Bhasma! The great Śaiva Durvāśā went to see the Kumbhāpāka hell, besmearing his whole body with Bhasma and looked downwards while he was looking at the sinners. At that time, accidentally a particle of Bhasma from his forehead was blown by air to the bodies of the sinners in the hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What cannot be brought about by Bhasma! The great Śaiva Durvāsā went to see the Kumbhīpāka hell, besmearing his whole body with Bhasma and looked downwards while he was looking at the sinners. At that time, accidentally a particle of Bhasma from his forehead was blown by air to the bodies of the sinners in the hell.

[Ch 15 Verse 66-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thereby they were freed of their sins and they got so much pleasure! Such is the greatness of Bhasma! Henceforth the Kumbhipāka will no more be a hell. It will be a Tirtha (holy place of pilgrimage) of the residents of the Pitylaks.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thereby they were freed of their sins and they got so much pleasure! Such is the greatness of Bhasma! Henceforth the Kumbhīpāka will no more be a hell. It will be a Tīrtha (holy place of pilgrimage) of the residents of the Pitrilokas.

[Ch 15 Verse 68-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Whoever will bathe there will be very happy. There is no doubt in this. Its name will be henceforth the Pitr Tirtha. O Sattama! My Lingam and the form of Bhagavatī ought to be placed there. The inhabitants of the Pitr Loka would worship them. This will be the best of all the Tirthas extant in the three Lokas. And if the Pitrśvari there be worshipped, know that the worship of the Triloki is done.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Whoever will bathe there will be very happy. There is no doubt in this. Its name will be henceforth the Pitri Tīrtha. O Sattama! My Liṅgam and the form of Bhagavatī ought to be placed there. The inhabitants of the Pitri Loka would worship them. This will be the best of all the Tīrthas extant in the three Lokas. And if the Pitriśvarī there be worshipped, know that the worship of the Trilokī is done.

[Ch 15 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: Hearing thus the words of Śaṅkara, the Deva of the Devas, He thanked Him and, taking His permission came to the Devas and informed them of everything what Śaṅkara had said. Hearing this, the Devas nodded their heads and said, “Sādhu (well, very well)” and began to glorify the greatness of Bhasma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- Hearing thus the words of Śaṅkara, the Deva of the Devas, He thanked Him and, taking His permission came to the Devas and informed them of everything what Śaṅkara had said. Hearing this, the Devas nodded their heads and said, “Sadhu (well, very well)” and began to glorify the greatness of Bhasma.

[Ch 15 Verse 72-73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Tormenter of the enemies! Hari, Brahmā and the other Devas began to culogise the glories of ashes. The Piṭrṣ became very glad to get a new Tirtha. The Devas planted a Śiva Lingam and the form of the Devi on the banks of the new Tirtha, and began to worship them regularly day by day.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Tormenter of the enemies! Hari, Brahmā and the other Devas began to eulogise the glories of ashes. The Pitris became very glad to get a new Tīrtha. The Devas planted a Śiva Liṅgam and the form of the Devī on the banks of the new Tīrtha, and began to worship them regularly day by day.

[Ch 15 Verse 74-75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sinners that were there suffering, all ascended on the celestial chariot and got up to Kailāśa. Even today they are all dwelling in Kailāśa and are known by the name of the Bhadras. The hell Kumbhipāka came to be built afterwards in another place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sinners that were there suffering, all ascended on the celestial chariot and got up to Kailāśa. Even today they are all dwelling in Kailāśa and are known by the name of the Bhadras. The hell Kumbhīpāka came to be built afterwards in another place.

[Ch 15 Verse 76-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Since that day the Devas did not allow any other devotee of Śiva to go to the newly created hell Kumbhipāka. Thus I have described to you the excellent greatness of the Bhasma. O Muni! What more can there be than the glories of the Bhasma! O Best of Munis! Now I am telling you of the usage of Ürdhvapundra (the vertical marks) according to the proper province of the devotees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Since that day the Devas did not allow any other devotee of Śiva to go to the newly created hell Kumbhīpāka. Thus I have described to you the excellent greatness of the Bhasma. O Muni! What more can there be than the glories of the Bhasma! O Best of Munis! Now I am telling you of the usage of Ūrdhapuṇḍra (the vertical marks) according to the proper province of the devotees.

[Ch 15 Verse 78-79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Listen. I will now speak what I have ascertained from the study of the Vaiṣṇava Śāstras, the measure of Úrdhvapundra, according to the Anguli measurements, the colour, mantra, Devatā and the fruits thereof. Hear. The earth required is to be seen red from the crests of hills, the banks of the rivers, the place of Śiva (Śiva Kṣettram), the ocean beaches, the ant-hill, or from the roots of the Tulasi plants.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Listen. I will now speak what I have ascertained from the study of the Vaiṣṇava Śāstras, the measure of Ūrdhapuṇḍra, according to the Anguli measurements, the colour, mantra, Devatā and the fruits thereof. Hear. The earth required is to be seen red from the crests of hills, the banks of the rivers, the place of Śiva (Śiva Kṣettram), the ocean beaches, the ant-hill, or from the roots of the Tulasī plants.

[Ch 15 Verse 80-81]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The earth is not to be had from any other places. The black coloured earth brings in peace, the red-colour earth brings in powers to bring another to one's control; the yellow-coloured earth increases prosperity; and the white-coloured earth gives Dharma (religion).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The earth is not to be had from any other places. The black coloured earth brings in peace, the red-colour earth brings in powers to bring another to one’s control; the yellow-coloured earth increases prosperity and the white-coloured earth gives Dharma (religion).

[Ch 15 Verse 82-83]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If the Ürdhvapundra be drawn by the thumb, nourishment is obtained; if it be drawn by the middle finger, longevity is increased; if it be drawn by nameless or ring finger, food is obtained and if it be drawn by the forefinger, liberation is attained. So the Ürdhvapundras ought to be drawn by these fingers, only be careful to see that the nails do not touch at the time of making the mark.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If the Ūrdhapuṇḍra be drawn by the thumb, nourishment is obtained; if it be drawn by the middle finger, longevity is increased; if it be drawn by nameless or ring finger, food is obtained and if it be drawn by the fore finger, liberation is attained. So the Ūrdhapuṇḍras ought to be drawn by these fingers, only be careful to see that the nails do not touch at the time of making the mark.

[Ch 15 Verse 84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The shape of the Ürdhvapundra (the vertical mark or sign on the fore-head) is like a flame or like the opening bud of a lotus, or like the leaf of a bamboo, or like a fish, or like a tortoise or like a conch-shell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The shape of the Ūrdhapuṇḍra (the vertical mark or sign on the fore-head) is like a flame or like the opening bud of a lotus, or like the leaf of a bamboo, or like a fish, or like a tortoise or like a conch-shell.

[Ch 15 Verse 85-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ürdhvapundra, ten Angulis high is the super best; nine Aṅgulis high, is best; eight Aṅgulis high, is good; the middling Ürdhvapundra is of three kinds as it is of sevcn Āngulas, six Āngulas, or five Āngulas. The lowest Ürdhvapundra is again of three kinds as it is four Angulas, three Āngulas or two Āngulas high.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ūrdhapuṇḍra, ten Angulis high is the super best; nine Angulis high, is best; eight Angulis high, is good; the middling Ūrdhapuṇḍra is of three kinds as it is of seven Angulas, six Angulas, or five Angulas. The lowest Ūrdhapuṇḍra is again of three kinds as it is four Angulas, three Angulas or two Angulas high.

[Ch 15 Verse 87]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On the Ürdhvapundra of the forehead, you must meditate Keśava, on the belly you must think of Nārāyana; on the heart, you must meditate on Mādhava; and on the neck, you must meditate on Govinda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On the Ūrdhapuṇḍra of the forehead, you must meditate Keśava, on the belly you must think of Nārāyaṇa; on the heart, you must meditate on Mādhava; and on the neck, you must meditate on Govinda.

[Ch 15 Verse 88-90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevitbhāgavatam So on the right side of the belly, you must meditate on Madhusūdana; on the roots of the ears, on Trivikrama; on the left belly, on Vāmana; on the arms, on Śrīdhara; on the ears, Hrṣīkeśa; on the back, Padmanābha; on the shoulders Dāmodara; and on the head Brahmarandra you must meditate on Vāsudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So on the right side of the belly, you must meditate on Madhūsūdana; on the roots of the ears, on Trivikrama; on the left belly, on Vāmana; on the arms, on Śrīdhara; on the ears, Hṛṣīkeśa; on the back, Padmanābha; on the shoulders Dāmodara; and on the head Brahmarandhra you must meditate on Vāsudeva.

[Ch 15 Verse 91-93]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the twelve names are to be meditated. In the morning or in the evening time when you are going to make the Pūja or Homa, you are to take duly, single-in-intent, the above names and make the marks of Ürdhvapuṇḍras. Any man, with Ürdhvapuṇḍra on his head, is always pure, whether he be impure, or of unrighteous conduct or whether he commits a sin mentally. Wherever he dies, he comes to My Abode even if he be of a Cāṇḍāla caste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the twelve names are to be meditated. In the morning or in the evening time when you are going to make the Pūjā or Homa, you are to take duly, single-in-intent, the above names and make the marks of Ūrdhapuṇḍras. Any man, with Ūrdhapuṇḍra on his head, is always pure, whether he be impure, or of unrighteous conduct or whether he commits a sin mentally. Wherever he dies, he comes to My Abode even if he be of a Cāṇḍāla caste.

[Ch 15 Verse 94-95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My devotees (Vira Vaiṣṇavas or Mahāvira Vaiṣṇavas) who know My Nature must keep an empty space between the two lines of Ürdhvapundra of the form of the Viṣṇupada (the feet of Viṣṇu) and those who are my best devotees are to use nice Ürdhvapundras, made of turmeric powder, of the size of a spear (Śūla), of the form of the feet of Viṣṇu (Viṣṇu padah).
NEW CORR ENG ──► My devotees ( Vīra Vaiṣṇavas or Mahāvīra Vaiṣṇavas) who know My Nature must keep an empty space between the two lines of Ūrdhapuṇḍra of the form of the Viṣṇupada (the feet of Viṣṇu) and those who are my best devotees are to use nice Ūrdhapuṇḍras, made of turmeric powder, of the size of a spear (Śūla), of the form of the feet of Viṣṇu (Viṣṇu padah).

[Ch 15 Verse 96]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The ordinary Vaipuravas are to use with Bhakti, the Ürdhvapunādrus without any empty space, but the form of it is to be like a flame, the blossom of a lily or like a bamboo leaf.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The ordinary Vaiṣṇavas are to use with Bhakti, the Ūrdhapuṇḍras without any empty space, but the form of it is to be like a flame, the blossom of a lily or like a bamboo leaf.

[Ch 15 Verse 97-99]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are Vaiṣṇavas in name only can use Ürdhvapūṇḍa for both the kinds, with or without any empty space. They incur no sin if they use one without an empty space. But those who are My good devotees, incur sin if they do not keep an empty space between the two vertical lines (in the Ürdhvapūṇḍa three vertical lines are used).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are Vaiṣṇavas in name only can use Ūrdhapuṇḍra of both the kinds, with or without any empty space. They iñcur no sin if they use one without an empty space. But those who are My good devotees, iñcur sin if they do not keep an empty space between the two vertical lines (in the Ūrdhapuṇḍra three vertical lines are used).

[Ch 15 Verse 100-102]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vaṣiṇavas who use excellent vertical rod like Ürdhvapuṇḍras keeping an empty space in the middle and uttering the mantra “Keśvāya Namah” build My Temple there. In the beautiful middle space of Ürdhvapuṇḍra, the Undecaying Viṣṇu is playing with Lakṣmī. That wretch, the twice-born who uses Ürdhvapuṇḍra without any empty apace kills Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī, seated there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vaiṣṇavas who use excellent vertical rod like Ūrdhapuṇḍras keeping an empty space in the middle and uttering the mantra “Kesvāya Namaḥ” build My Temple there. In the beautiful middle space of Ūrdhapuṇḍra, the Undecaying Viṣṇu is playing with Lakṣmī. That wretch, the twice-born who uses Ūrdhapuṇḍra without any empty apace kills Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī, seated there.

[Ch 15 Verse 103-104]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The stupid who uses Ürdhvapūndra without a vacant space goes successively to twenty-one hells. The Ürdhvapūndra should be of the size of a clear straight rod, lotus, flame, a fish with sharp straight edges and with vacant spaces between them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The stupid who uses Ūrdhapuṇḍra without a vacant space goes successively to twenty-one hells. The Ūrdhapuṇḍra should be of the size of a clear straight rod, lotus, flame, a fish with sharp straight edges and with vacant spaces between them.

[Ch 15 Verse 105]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Great Muni! The Brāhmaṇa should always use the Tripundra like the lock of hair on the crown of his head and like his Sacrificial thread; otherwise all his actions will be fruitless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Great Muni! The Brāhmaṇa should always use the Tripuṇḍra like the lock of hair on the crown of his head and like his Sacrificial thread; otherwise all his actions will be fruitless.

[Ch 15 Verse 106-107]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore in all ceremonies and actions the Brāhmanas ought to use Urdhvapundras of the form of a trident, a circle or of a square form. The Brāmana who knows the Vedas is never to use the semi-moonlike mark (Tilaka) on his bead. The man who is of the Brāhmin caste and follows the path of the Vedas should not even by mistake use any other mark than those above-mentioned.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore in all ceremonies and actions the Brāhmaṇas ought to use Ūrdhapuṇḍras of the form of a trident, a circle or of a square form. The Brāhmaṇa who knows the Vedas is never to use the semi-moonlike mark (Tilak) on his bead. The man who is of the Brāhmin caste and follows the path of the Vedas should not even by mistake use any other mark than those above-mentioned.

[Ch 15 Verse 108-109]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Other sorts of puṇdras (marks) that are mentioned in other Vaiṣṇava Śāstras for the attainment of fame, beauty, etc., the Veda-knowing Brāhmaṇas should not use them. The Vaidik Brāhmaṇas should not use even in error any other Tilaks than the curved Tripundras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Other sorts of puṇḍras (marks) that are mentioned in other Vaiṣṇava Śāstras for the attainment of fame, beauty, etc., the Veda-knowing Brāhmaṇas should not use them. The Vaidik Brāhmaṇas should not use even in error any other Tilaks than the curved Tripuṇḍras

[Ch 15 Verse 110]
OLD OCR ENG ──► If, out of delusion, the man, following the path of the Vedas, uses other sorts of Tripundras, he would certainly go down to hell.
NEW CORR ENG ──► If, out of delusion, the man, following the path of the Vedas, uses other sorts of Tripuṇḍras, he would certainly go down to hell.

[Ch 15 Verse 111-113]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Veda-knowing Brāhmanas would certainly go down to hell if they use other sorts of Tripundras on their bodies. Only the Tilakas, prescribed in the Vedas ought to be used by those who are devoted to the Vedas. Those who do not observe the duties of the Vedas would use Tilakas approved of by other Sāstras. Those should use marks approved of by the Vedas whose Deity is that of the Vedas. Those who follow the Tanta Sāstras different from the Vedas, should use marks approved of by the Tantras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Veda-knowing Brāhmaṇas would certainly go down to hell if they use other sorts of Tripuṇḍras on their bodies. Only the Tilakas, prescribed in the Vedas ought to be used by those who are devoted to the Vedas. Those who do not observe the duties of the Vedas would use Tilaks approved of by other Śāstras. Those should use marks approved of by the Vedas whose Deity is that of the Vedas. Those who follow the Tantra Śāstras different from the Vedas, should use marks approved of by the Tantras.

[Ch 15 Verse 114-115]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Mahā Deva is the Veda's Deity and, ready to deliver from the bordages of the world, He has prescribed the Tilakas prescribed in the Vedas for the benefit of the devotees. The marks prescribed by Visnu, also a Deity of the Vedas, are also those of the Vedas. His other Avatāras also use marks approved of by the Vedas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Mahā Deva is the Veda’s Deity and, ready to deliver from the bondages of the world, He has prescribed the Tilakas prescribed in the Vedas for the benefit of the devotees. The marks prescribed by Viṣṇu, also a Deity of the Vedas, are also those of the Vedas. His other Avataras also use marks approved of by the Vedas.

[Ch 15 Verse 116]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Tripundras and the besmearing of the body with ashes are according to the Vedas. In the Tantra Śāstra different from the Vedas, there is the usage of Tripundra and other marks. But they are not to be used by the Vaidikas. No never.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Tripuṇḍras and the besmearing of the body with ashes are according to the Vedas. In the Tantra Śāstra different from the Vedas, there is the usage of Tripuṇḍra and other marks. But they are not to be used by the Vaidiks. No never.

[Ch 15 Verse 117-119]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who follow the path of the Vedas should use the curved Tripundras and Bhasma on their foreheads according to the rules prescribed in the Vedas. He who has obtained the highest state of Nārāyaṇa, ॥.e., who has realised My Nature, ought to use always on their 'orehæds Śūla marks scented with fragrant sandalpaste. Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of using the Tripundra and Urdhvapundra marksin the Mahāpurūnam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who follow the path of the Vedas should use the curved Tripuṇḍras and Bhasma on their foreheads according to the rules prescribed in the Vedas. He who has obtained the highest state of Nārāyaṇa, i.e., who has realised My Nature, ought to use always on their foreheads Śūla marks scented with fragrant sandalpaste. Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of using the Tripuṇḍra and Ūrdhapuṇḍra marks in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
