CHAPTER IX

On Indra's Getting the Fruits of Bramahatyā and on the Downfall of the King Nahusa

यास उवाच

तां वीक्ष्य विपुलापांगी रहुः शोकसमपित्ताम् ।

आखण्डपत: प्रियां भाषां विस्मितछात्रावतीन्तां ॥ १ ॥

कर्मप्रगाता कानते कशं ज्ञातस्या ह्रहाम् ।

दुर्जेय: सर्वभृतानां संशित्योज्ञि शुभानने ॥ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: Indra was quite surprised to see in this state of solitude his dear wife Śaci, large-eyed and overwhelmed with much sorrow and spoke thus: “O Beloved! I am remaining here alone in this desolate place unnoticed by all the Jivas; O Auspicious fezed One! How have you come to know this! And how is it that you have come here!

शुख्याच

देव देया: प्रसादेन ऋतातोरस्था भयानित है ।

पुस्तत्या: प्रसादेन प्राप्तास्थि त्वां दिवस्पते ॥ ३ ॥

Śaci said: “O Lord of the Devas! I have been able to know this place where you are staying by the grace of Bhagavati’s Feet and I will get you back by Her grace.

नहुषो नाम राजर्षि: स्थापितो भवदासने ।

त्रिदर्शीर्यनिधिश्रेश व स मां बधाति नित्यशः ॥ 4 ॥

The Devas and Munis all united and have installed the King Nahuṣa in your throne. That fellow says “O fair One! I am now made the King Indra; therefore you worship me as your husband.”

पर्ति मां कुक्च चार्विक्र तुसासहं सुराधिपम् ।

एवं वदति मां पापम किं ककोमी वलाईन ॥ 5 ॥

And thus oppresses me always. O Destroyer of other's strength! That vicious one speaks to me thus; I am weak; What can I do to him?"

इन खाया

कालाकांक्षी वराग्रेः संश्चितोस्म यदच्छ्या ।

तथा त्वमपि कल्याणि सुश्विधं स्यमनः कुक् ॥ 6 ॥

Indra said: “O Beautiful One! I am now here waiting for the proper opportunity; O auspicious One! You should also make your mind calm and remain there, and wait for the proper time.”

व्यास उवाच

इतुच्छा तेन सा देखी पतिनातिषूर्शसिता ।

निःश्रमेहाह तं शक्रे वेभमानाउतिछुःखिता ॥ ७ ॥

कर्थ तिहे महाभाग यापात्मा मां कशानुगाम् ।

कंत्रिष्यिति मदोन्मनो खरदानेन गर्जितः ॥ ८ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! After Indra had spoken thus, Śacī Devī became sorrowful, drew a deep sigh and, trembling, said: "O Fortunate One! How can I stay there? That vicious man, puffed up with vanity and proud of his position will forcibly bring, me under his control.

देवांश्र मुनयः सर्वे मापुच्छनुद्याकुलाः ।

तं भगव स्करारोहे देवराजं स्मारातुम् ॥ 9 ॥

The Devas and Munis say this to me out of his fear: "O Beautiful One! The Lord of the Devas is now very much distressed with the arrows of the Cupid; therefore go and worship him."

ब्रह्म्यस्ति श्रवुन वाडवो बलवर्जितः ।

कर्थ मां रक्षितुं शक्तो भयंदेवानुप: सदा ॥ १ ० ॥

O Tormentor of foes! How can the Brāhmin Brhaspati protect me, being himself powerless and under the control of the Devas.

तस्मार्थिताउन्सित महती नार्यंदं शरावर्धिति ।

अनावा किं करिष्यामि विपरीत विधौ विषो ॥ 11 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

O Lord! This is now my grave anxiety; I am a weak woman, having none to protect me and therefore always under the guidance of a man.

नार्यस्यहं न कुलटा लच्चिन्तास्तिपतिता ।

नास्ति से गर्शणं तय यो मां क्षिति दुःखितान् ॥ १२ ॥

Fate is now against me; how can I keep myself religious? I am a chaste woman, devoted to my husband; I have got no shelter there; who will protect me when I fall into misery!

इन्न उवाच

उपायं प्रबंधीयघ तं कुकच्य वरानते ।

शीलं ते दुःखिते काले परित्रांत भविष्यति ॥ १३ ॥

Indra said: “O Beautiful One! I will now tell you one means which, if you adopt, will no doubt preserve your character in times of crisis.

पेरण रहिता नारी न भवेच्च पतितजा ।

उपार्थे: कोदिधि: काम विभवित्सान्तीचलां ॥ 14 ॥

Woman cannot preserve their chastity when they are protected by others by thousand and one means; for lust penetrates into their restless minds and carries them to impure ways.

शीतलेव हि नारीणां सदा रक्षति पापतः ।

तस्मालं शीलमाखाय स्थित भव सुचिचिस्ते ॥ 15 ॥

It is the good and pure character that preserves a woman from a vicious course; therefore O Smiling One! You adopt this good conduct and character and remain steady in your place.

यदा त्वां नहुर्णे राजा बलादाकर्षयैल्वतः ।

तदा त्वं समयं कृत्वा गुर्णं वचंच भूपमिति ॥ 16 ॥

एकाने ततसमीपे त्वं गत्वा वद मदालसे ।

ऋषियाने दिव्येन मायुषैहि जगतवे ॥ 17 ॥

In case that deceitful wicked King Nahuṣa shows his violence upon you, then take time and secretly cheat him, O Madālase! Go to him when there will be no other body present and say: "O Lord of the world! Please come to me on a conveyance carried by the Rṣis (great ascetics), I will then be very delighted and gladly yield myself to you; this is certainly my vow.

एवं तव वरो प्रीता भविष्यामीति मे ब्रतम् ।

इति तं बद सुशोणिता तु परिमोहितः ॥ 18 ॥

O Beautiful One! When you will say thus, that King, blin.Jed by passion, will engage the Munis for the carriers of his conveyance.

कामाधि: स मुनी-याने योजविष्यति पार्थिवः।

अवरथे तापसो घूरं शागवद्यां कंरिति ॥ १९ ॥

The ascetics, then, will be angry and curse him; the Munis will certainly burn him by the fire of their wrath; and the Divine Mother will no doubt help you.

साहायंं जगद्धका ते कार्यिति न संशय: ।

जगद्धावादस्तु: सडूटं न कदाचन ॥ 20 ॥

He who remembers the lotus-feet of the Ambikā Devi never meets with any difficulties; and if there arises any difficulty, know certainly that it is for his immeasurable benefit.

यदि जायेत तत्वाथि जेयं तत्वलये किल ।

तस्मात्सर्वप्रयनेन मणिह्वीधावासिनीम् ॥ 21 ॥

भज लें घुवरेजानीं गुरुबाव्यानुसारतः ।

Therefore worship, with your whole heart, the Mother of the Universe, Who resides in the jewelled island (Mani Dvipa) according to the words of the Guru Brhaspati.

व्यास उवाच

इत्याख्याता शची तेन जगाम नटुबं प्रति ॥ 22 ॥

तशेसुकत्वास्तिविश्रस्ता भाविकार्यं कृतोक्षाम ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the Indra's words, Śaci Devi said: "Let it be so" and went to Nahuṣa, filled with confidence and inspiration to carry on the future work.

नसृषस्ता समातोलय मृदुत्तो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ॥ 23 ॥

स्वागतं सत्यबचनैस्त्वद्धीनीजस्मि कामिन ।

दासोर्जं तत स्वलेन पालितं वचनं तथा ॥ 24 ॥

यद्गाता समीपे मे तुहो:5मि मितभाषिधि ।

Nahusa was very glad to see Śaci Devī and spoke thus: "O Sweet-speaking One! Are you all right? I am now completely yours; you have fulfilled my word; therefore I say truly that I am your servant. "O Gentle-speaking One! When you have come to me, know that I am very glad."

Book VI Chapter IX

न च ग्रीडा तव्या काव्याँ भवतं मां भज सुंमिते ॥ 25 ॥

कार्य बद विशालासिक्र कार्थ्यामि तव प्रियम् ।

“O Smilling One! Do not feel any shame before me. I am now your devotee; worship me. O large eyed One! Speak out what is that dear thing that I can do for you? I will carry that out at once.

शब्यवाच

सर्व कृते त्वया कार्य मम कृमियसावस ।। २६ ॥

मनेराधोजित मे देव शृणु चित्रेधुना विभो ।

वास्छितं कृक कल्याण त्वक्षागाड़मतः परम् ॥ 27 ॥

Śacī said: “O Lord Vāsava! You have done all the works; now I have got one desire to ask from you, kindly fulfil this and then I will be yours. O One full of auspiciousness! Now fulfil my desire. I am speaking this to you.”

ब्रवीमि मानसोसाहं लें त कृतीमहाहिंसि ।

कार्य तं बहुि चज्ञस्य कपोम तव जाडितुम् ॥ 28 ॥

अलभ्यमयि दायासि तृभ्यं सुषुं वदस्य माम् ।

Nahusā said: “O Thou, having a face sweet like the Moon! Speak out your desire; I will carry it out. O Beautiful One with nice eye brows! Even if that be unattainable, I will give that to you.”

शल्यवाच

कयं ब्वीयि राजेन्द्र प्रत्ययो नासित मे तत ॥ 29 ॥

गपयं कुरु राजेन्द्र यत्करीय प्रियं तत ।

राजानः सत्यवचसो दुर्विभा एव भूतते ॥ 30 ॥

पशुवद्वीयोर्न्हे राज्ञालास सत्येन यंत्रितम् ।

कृते चेद्धक्तिहे भूप सदा ते शयर्सितीं ॥ 31 ॥

भविष्याति तृताभवू के सत्यमेतनुचो मन ।

ŠaCI said: “O King of Kings! I cannot trust you; Swear on oath that you will fulfill my desire. O King! A truthful King is very rare on this earth; I will speak out my desire when I will be convinced that you are bound by truth. O King! When you will fulfil my desire, I will always remain under your control; this I speak truly to you.”

नहुय उवाच

अवश्यमेव कर्तेल्यं वचनं तव सुन्दारि ॥ 32 ॥

शपामि सुकृतेनाहं यज्ञदानकृतेन वे ।

Nahuṣa said: "O Beautiful One! On all the

sacrifices and gifts that I have ever made, I swear, on all my merits, that I will certainly carry out your word."

शच्याच

इन्द्रस्य हरयो वाहा गजश्रेय रथस्तथा ॥ 33 ॥

गरड़ी वासुदेवस्य यमस्य मिहिषस्तथा ।

वृषभः शुक्रस्यायि बह्जाणो वरवापति: ॥ 34 ॥

मयूरः कारितिकेयस्य गतास्यस्य तु मुपकः ।

इच्छान्यहमपूर्वे वै वाहानं ते सुराप्रिय ॥ 35 ॥

यत्र विष्णोनं करूस्य नासुराणां न सूक्षाम।

बहुतं त्वां महाराज मुनवः संशितबताः ॥ 36 ॥

सर्वे शिविकव्या राजज्ञतादूम मय वाजिडऊम् ।

सर्वदेवाधिकं त्वां वे जानापि वसुपाधिपि ॥ 37 ॥

तेन ते तेजसो बूदिं याज्ञायमतान्त्रता ।

Śacī said: “Indra has got for his vehicles the horse Ucaisāvā, the Airāvata elephant and the chariot; Vāsudeva has got his vehicle Garudā; Yama has got his buffalo; Śaṅkara his Bull; Brahmā his Swan; Kārtika has got his peacock and Ganeśa has got his mouse. But now, O Lord of the Devas! I want to see your vehicle, never witnessed before; I went to see the Munis and the great ascetics, observing vows, to be your vehicle; this is not Viṣṇu’s, Rudra’s nor of the Devas, and Rāksasas. O King! Let the Munis carry your conveyance, this is my ever burning desire. O King of this earth! I know you the highest of all the Devas; let your glory and splendor increase ever and ever; this is the intense desire reigning in my heart.”

यास जावा

तत्यासतुझचनं श्रुत्वा ग्रहस्य ज्ञानवृबलः ॥ 38 ॥

मोहितस्तु महादेव्या कृतं मोहेन तक्थापण ।

उवाच वचनं घृपः संस्तुवन् वासविश्रिया ॥ 39 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing Śaci's words, Nahuṣa, weak in intellect, laughed and beguiled by the Māyā of Bhagavatī began to praise her and said at once: "O Beautiful One! Truly you have made a nice suggestion of my vehicle.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

नहुण उवाच

सत्यपुर्ने त्वाया तपिव वाहनं कविरं मय ।

कर्णिष्यामि सुकेशान्ते वचनं तव सर्वथा ॥ 40 ॥

न ह्यल्यार्वीं भवति यो वाहा-कुकते पुनीन ।

अहमाक्रहु यानेन त्वामेधायि शुचिश्मिते ॥ 41 ॥

O One having luxuriant hairs! I will soon carry out your words. O Sweet-smiling One! Whoever is effeminate and of weak virility, he is never able to engage the Munis as his carriers; no doubt, my unbounded strength will be rendered manifest when I come to you on a vehicle carried by the Munis.

सतर्षेयी मां बक्ष्यिति सर्वे देवर्षेयरता ।

समर्थे विजु लोकेषु ज्ञाला में तपसा5चिकम् ॥ 42 ॥

What wonder is there that the seven Rsis (the seven stars of the constellation Great Bear) and all the Devarsis would carry me, knowing me as the most capable and superior in all the three worlds by virtue of my sheer asceticism?

व्यास उवाच

इल्युक्ला तां सुसन्तुओं विससर्जे हरिप्रियम् ।

मृनीनाहूय सर्वसत्तानित्युवाच सम्पातितः ॥ 4 3 ॥

नतृष उवाच

अहमिंद्रीउषा भो विष्ञा: सर्वशक्तिसम्पतितः ।

कार्यमत्र प्रकुवन्तु भवन्तो शिवगतस्मयाः ॥ 44 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! The King Nahuṣa became very pleased and dismissed Śacī Devī. He, then, with a heart flamed with passion, called the Munis and said: "O Munis! I am now become Indra and endowed with all powers thereof; therefore you all do my work without being at all surprised.

इन्सारसं भया प्राप्त नेन्नारणी मापुर्मिति च ।

आकारिता च मां बृते प्रेमपूर्वमिदं चः ॥ 45 ॥

मुनियानेन देेवेन्र माग्यरिंह सुराधि ।

देवदेव महाराज मतिथयं कुरु मान्त ॥४६ ॥

I have got the seat of Indra but Indrañi is not coming to me. I called her to my presence and when I informed her of my desire, She had spoken to me with affection the following words: "O Indra of the Devas! O Giver of one's honour! Better come

to me on a vehicle carried by the Munis and do thus the one thing for me that I like."

एतकार्यं मुनिश्रेष्ठा ममायन्तं दुरामवम् ।

भवाद्रस्तु प्रकर्तेयं सर्वेवे दयातुर्भि: ॥ 47 ॥

O Maharsis! To carry out this task is, indeed, difficult for me; therefore do you all unite and, out of mercy, do this for me in all its completeness.

मनो दहिते मे कामः शक्रभन्त्यां प्रतितन् ।

भबन्तः शरणं मे3डा कुक्छं कार्यमद्धुतम् ॥ 48 ॥

My heart is being always burnt, as I am very much attached to the wife of Indra; so I take refuge unto you to do this wonderful work for me.

अगतिरूपुखातस्य शुत्वा वाव्यमसत्करम् ।

अंगीचक्रुं श वावित्वात्कृपया परमर्षेः ॥ 49 ॥

Though this request was very indecent and greatly humiliating yet the Munis agreed to it, out of pity, and also impelled, as it were, by the great Fate.

अड़ीकृतोय तात्रये मुनिपित्तचदर्दिधिनः ।

मूरं प्राप नृप: कामं पौलेगीकृतमानसः ॥ ५० ॥

आकृहु शिवकां रायां संश्वित्तल्यापातिनः।

वाहाहृकृता मुनीन्द्वल्यापरं संपर्टि चाब्वीत् ॥ ५१ ॥

When the Great Seers, the Munis consented to this proposal, the King, whose heart was very much attached to the daughter of Pulomā, became very glad and getting on the beautiful vehicle carried by the Munis, told them, move on quickly (Sarpa, Sarpa).

कामातंः सोउम्यगानुक पानेत नुभिमसतकम् ।

अगसितं तापसछेले लोपामुजायितं तदा ॥ 52 ॥

वातातिपश्यकर्तारं समुद्रस्यापि शोषकम् ।

कशाया ताड्वयास पर्वाणग्राहताः ॥ 53 ॥

Then the King Nahuṣa, getting very much impassioned, touched with his feet the heads of the Munis, and, being as it were smitten by the arrows of cupid, began to whip frequently the Rsi Agastya, the best of the ascetics, who devoured the Rākṣasa Vātāpi, who was the husband of Lopāmundā and who drank out the ocean, saying move on, move, on (Sarpa, Sarpa—another meaning of which is Snake).

इज्ञात्थितचित्तोजसी सर्वेति प्रबुबन्यूनिम ।

तं शगाणय मुनिः कुब्दः कशाणातमनुस्मन् ॥ 54 ॥

Book VI Chapter IX

The Muni, then, became very angry, on being thus whipped, and cursed him saying: "O Wicked One! As you are whipping me, saying Sarpa, Sarpa, so go and remain in the dense forest as a huge snake.

सपों भव दुराचार वने घोरव्युमहान् ।

बहुवर्षसूद्वाराय यत्र करलेगो महान्येवत् ॥ 55 ॥

विविर्थसि वीर्ण पुनः स्वर्गमाव्यसि ।

दूद्वा युधिष्ठिं नाम तव मोक्षो भविष्यति ॥ 56 ॥

प्रश्नानामुन्तं श्रुला धर्मपुत्रमुखाततः ।

When many years will elapse and when you will crawl on your own limb and suffer intense troubles, after that you will again come to heaven. You will be free from the curse when you will see the King Yudhisthira and hear from him the answers to several questions."

व्यास उवाच

एवं शप्त: स राजर्षि: स्तुला तं पुनिसतामम् ॥ 57 ॥

स्वार्यपात सहसा सरोक्षघधोरोभवत् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus cursed, the King Nahusa began to chant hymns to that best of the Munis, and, while praising, fell from the Heavens and instantly turned into a snake.

ब्रह्मपतिततां गता ततसा मानसं प्रति ॥ 58 ॥

इन्याय सर्ववृत्तां कथयामास विस्तरात् ।

तच्छूता मघवा रासः स्वानीत्यव्यवादिकम् ॥ 59 ॥

मृदितो5भून्हाराज स्थितस्तत्रे वास्तः ।

Bhraspati, then, quickly went to the Mānasarovara Lake and informed Indra everything in detail. Indra became very glad on hearing in detail of the downfall of the King Nahuṣa from Heaven and remained there gladly.

देवाधु मुनयो दूर्वा ननुयं पत्तें पुर्वि ॥ 60 ॥

जयसु: सर्वेशि तरैव यजैरः सरसि स्थितः ।

When the Devas and Munis saw this downfall into the earth of Nahuṣa, they all went to the Lake Mānasarovara where Indra was staying.

नामश्राय सुरा: सर्वे मुनिभि: सहितास्तव ॥ 6 1 ॥

सर्पे समानयामासुर्पानपूर्व जशीपतिन ।

They then all encouraged Indra and honoured him by bringing him back to the Heavens.

समागत ततः शंक़ा सर्वे ते मुनवः सुराः ॥ 62 ॥

स्थापवित्वा उसने पशुतदायिकें दयुः शिवम् ।

All the Devas and Rsis installed Indra on the throne and then performed the inauguration ceremony of the all auspicious Devī.

इन्होर्धि स्वासं न प्राय शन्या सह सुरालये ॥ 63 ॥

चित्रोंके नन्दने रये कानने प्रेमयुक्ता ।

On getting back his own throne. Indra, too, began to sport in the beautiful Nandana Garden with his dear consort Śacī, in the home of the Devas.

व्यास उवाच

एविमंद्रण सम्यानं दुःखं परमदाकणम् ॥ 64 ॥

ह्हलाउपूरं कामकर्ण विश्वश्वयं महापुभिन् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Indra had to suffer such severe hardships on account of his slaying the Maharṣi Viśvarāpu, the Lord of the Asuras.

पुरन्देव्या: प्रसादेन स्वस्थानं प्राप्तावधुप ॥ 65 ॥

एतते स्वामाख्यातं वृत्रासुर्वाध्राश्यम् ।

यस्युधोई त्वया राजकानानकमनुतनम् ॥ 66 ॥

Subsequently through the grace of the Devi, he got back his own seat. O King! Thus I have narrated before you to my best, this excellent story of the killing of Vṛtrāsura and thus have answered your question. O Ornament of the Kuru family! The fruits will be exactly according to the Karma done.

यारुशं कुकते कर्म तारुणं फलमाण्यान् ।

अवयपेवे भोक्त्यं कृतं कर्म शुभाशुभम् ॥ 67 ॥

इति श्रीदेवीभागवते महापुराणे घरकल्भे दुवबधो नाम

नवमो5वाय: 11 9 11

The effects of the Karma done must be borne whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. (So Indra had to suffer for his Karma, the killing of a Brāhmaṇa)

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on

Indra's getting the fruits of his killing a Brāthmana

and on the downfall of the King Nahusā

from the Heavens in the Mahāpurāṇaḥ

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000

verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

