CHAPTER XIV

On the Glories of the Devi

जनमेव जयात

श्रुतों वे हरिणा कल्युतो यज्ञे विस्तरतो हित्र।

महिमानं त्वाध्यवया वद्र विस्तरतो मम ॥ १ ॥

श्रुत्वा देयाशुरिंव वे कुर्बे मखमानुत्तमम् ।

प्रसादात्व विश्रेदं भविष्यामि च पावनः ॥ २ ॥

Janamejaya spoke: “O Dvija! I have heard in detail the Devi Yajña, performed by Śri Viṣṇu. Now describe Her Glory and glorious deeds. After hearing these, the Devi’s glorious deeds, I will also perform that, the best of all sacrifices. Thereby I will no doubt be pure through your favour.”

व्यास उवाच

शूणु राजन्यवस्यामि देयाश्रितमुन्तमम् ।

इतिहास पुराणं च कथयामि सुविस्तम् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: “O King. Hear, I am describing to you the history of the most auspicious mighty deeds of the Devi, according to the Purānas.

कौसलेषु नृपश्रेषु: सुर्वंक्षरासमुद्धः ।

पुथपुत्रो महातेजा धुवसिंधितरिति स्मृत: ॥ 4 ॥

धर्मात्मा सत्यसंध्र शर्णभ्रवित्ते रतः ।

अयोधायायां समुद्धायां राज्यं चक्रे शुर्चित्रतः ॥ 5 ॥

In days of yore, there reigned in the country of Kosala, King Dhruvasandhi of the Solar Dynasty. He was the son of Puspa and celebrated on account of his great prowess. He was truthful religious, engaged in doing good to his subjects, obeying the laws of the four castes and Śāramas. He being pure, performed his regal duties in the flourishing city of Ayodhyā.

ब्राह्मण: श्रविता यैश्या: श्रूत्रश्रान्ये तथा द्विजा: ।

स्वां स्वां वृत्ति समास्थाय तत्राज्ये धर्मोत्रभवन् ॥ 6 ॥

The Brāhmanas, Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras and other good persons all lived religiously under his rule, each abiding by his own profession.

न चौरा: पिशुना पूर्णतिस्तस्य राजेचे च कुत्रचित् ।

दंभा: कृतचना मुख्यांश्य वसन्ति किल मानवाः ॥ 7 ॥

No thieves, cheats, cunning persons, vain and arrogant persons treacherous and illiterate men were allowed to remain in his kingdom.

एवं वै वर्तमानस्य नृपस्य कुकसत्तम ।

दे पत्थौ रूपसम्पत्रे ह्रासतु: कामभोगरे ॥ 8 ॥

O best of Kurus! Thus ruling virtuously, the king had two wives, both of them young, fair and beautiful and well able to give delights and enjoyments to the king.

मनोराम धर्मपत्नी सुरूपास्तिविचक्षणा ।

लीलावती द्रितीया च सास्पि रूपगुणोन्दिता ॥ 9 ॥

The first and lovely wife was Manoramā, and the second was Lilāvati. Both of them were exceedingly handsome, intelligent and qualified.

विज्ञहार सपत्नीभ्यां गृहेषुपवनेषु च ।

मौडीगिरी दीर्घिकासु सोयेषु विविधेषु च ॥ १ ० ॥ ॥

The king enjoyed much with them in palaces, gardens, romantic hills, lakes, and various beautiful mansions.

मनोरामा शुभे काले सुवेषे पुत्रमुत्तमम् ।

सुर्दर्नाभिधं पूत्रं राजत्कृष्णसंयुन्तम् ॥ ११ ॥

In the auspicious moment, Manoramā gave birth to a beautiful child, endowed with all royal qualifications. The child was named, in due course, Sudarśana.

लीलावत्यपि तत्वन्ती मासैनेकेन भापिनी ।

सुवुले सुन्दरं पुरं गुधे पशे दिने तथा ॥ 12 ॥

Next within one month, his second wife the fair Lilāvatī in the auspicious fortnight and in the auspicious day, gave birth to an excellent child.

चकार नृपतिस्तत्र जातकमार्विकं द्वयो: ।

ददौ दानानि विधेभ्यः पुजजनप्रमोदितः ॥ 13 ॥

The King then performed the Jāta-Karma (ceremonies on the birth of a child) and being very glad, made lots of presents, wealth etc., to the Brāhmaṇas.

प्रीति तयोः समां राजा चकार सुतयोगैः ।

नृपधाकार सौहाद्वैधतरं न कदाचन ॥ 14 ॥

Book III Chapter XIV

The King shewed affection equally to the two children; never he made any distinction between them.

चूताकर्म तयोश्रके विधिना नृपसत्तमः ।

यथाविभवमेवासी प्रीतियुक्तः परन्तः ॥ 15 ॥

The king, the tormenter of the foes, was very glad and performed duly the Cūdākarana ceremony according to his position and wealth.

कृतचूदी सुती कामां जहतुर्गुपतेमंतः ।

क्रीडसानावृषी कान्ती लोकानामानुरंजकां ॥ 16 ॥

The sight of these two sons delighted very much the people. Now seeing these Krtačūdas, and playing, the king was merged in the ocean of pleasure.

तयो सुरूर्णीने ज्येछो तीलावव्या: सुतः शुषः ।

शत्रुविसंक्रकः कामं चातुद्वाययो घयुष है ॥ 17 ॥

नृपते: प्रीतिजनको मघुवायवचासदर्शन: ।

प्रजानी वतल्पः सो5पृत्तया मफिजनस्य वे ॥ 18 ॥

Sudarśana was the eldest; but Śatrujit, the second beautiful son by Lilāvatī was of sweet and persuasive speech. His beautiful figure and sweet words gave very much delight to the king, and for these qualities, the child Śatrujit turned out also a favourite of the people and ministers.

तथा तस्मिकुपः प्रीति चकार गुणायोगतः ।

मन्दभायामन्दघावो न तथा वै सुदर्शनें ॥ 19 ॥

The king could not show so much affection to the unfortunate Sudarśana as he shewed to Śatrujit.

एवं गच्छिति काले तु धूवस्धिर्मूर्वोपात्म: ।

जगाम वनमध्येउसी मृगयाधिपतर: सदा ॥ 20 ॥

निनम्गुगान् रूक-कंक्रून्युक्तगावयाच्छशन् ।

महिषाछ्छपान्यड्वगीश्रकीड नृपतिर्वर्ने ॥ 21 ॥

Thus some days having passed, one day King Dhruvasandhi went out on a hunting expedition to the forest. He killed in the forest many deer, Ruru (a kind of deer), elephants, boar, hare, buffaloes, rhinoceros, camels and amused himself very much with this hunting affair.

क्रीडागने नृप तव वने घोरेप्रतिद्धको ।

उदतिष्ठिकुक्रान्तु सिंहः परमकोपनः ॥ 22 ॥

राजा शिलीमुखेनादी विद्धः कोधवर्ग गतः।

दूद्धाउप्रे नृपति सिंहो ननाद मेयनि स्कनः ॥ 23 ॥

While he was hunting thus, a lion got very much enraged, and, from a bush, suddenly jumped and came upon the king. That king of the beasts was already struck with arrows; now seeing the king in front, he loudly roared.

कृत्वा चोर्धें स लोगूल प्रसारितवृहतस्टः ।

ह्रंतुं नृपतिमाकाशादुव्यपतातिकोपनः ॥ 24 ॥

नृपतिसतरसा वीक्ष्य द्वापारसि करे तदा ।

वामे चर्म समादाय स्थितः सिंह इवापरः ॥ 25 ॥

He angrily lifted his long tail high up in the air and, puffing up his manes, jumped up high in the air to attack and to take the life of the king. Seeing this, instantly the king took sword in his right hand and shield in his left and stationed himself like another lion before him.

सेवकातस्य ये सर्वे तेपि वाणान्यथक् ।

अमुंचकृपिता: कामं सिंहोपरि रूपाचित्यतः ॥ 26 ॥

The king's followers, one and all, angrily shot arrows on the lion.

हाहाकारो महानासीलंप्रहारश्व टारणः ॥

उत्पात तत सिंहो नृपस्योरि टारणः ॥ 27 ॥

Then a loud uproar ensued; and all began to hurl arrows as best as they could. But, after all, that dangerous lion fell upon the king.

तं पतन्तं समालोक्य खड्गौनाथसहनपुः ।

सोउपि क्रूरैनखाडीघु तजागत्य विद्यातिरः ॥ 28 ॥

स नखौराह्तो राजा पपात च ममारे वे ।

चुकुगु: सैनिकासे तु निजीटुर्बिहिलेखतां ॥ 29 ॥

Seeing thus, the king struck him with his sword, but the lion also tore asunder the king, with his sharp nails. The king thus struck by the lion, fell on the spot and died. The soldiers cried aloud and killed the lion with arrows.

मृतः सिंहोर्पि तवैव भूपतिछा तथा मृतः ।

सैनिकर्मीभ्रुमुखाशु तत्रागाय निविदिताः ॥ 30 ॥

Thus both the king and lion lay dead on the spot; and the soldiers turned back to the palace and gave all the informations to the royal ministers.

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam

परतोकानां भूपं शुत्वा ते मन्रिसत्तमाः ।

संस्कारं कारायामासुरांचा तत्र वर्जितिके ॥ 31 ॥

When the munis heard the demise of the king, they went to the forest, performed the burning of the dead body of the king.

परतोकाक्रियां सर्वा विस्त्रो विधिपूर्वकम् ।

कारयामास तत्रैव परतोकपुरुखावहम् ॥ 32 ॥

The Maharṣi Vasisṭha performed duly on the same spot, all the funeral ceremonies, thus ensuring the king the safe journey to the next world.

प्रजा: प्रकृतयेडिव वसिष्ठघ महापुनि: ।

सूरर्जनं नृपं कटुं मनः चकुः परस्पर्भ ॥ 33 ॥

All the subject and the citizens and the Muni Vasisṭha counselled each other to install Sudarśana on the throne as the king.

धर्मपनीसुत शान्तः पुरुषश्र सुलक्षणः ।

अयं नृपासनाईश हाबुब्वमान्सितसना: ॥ 34 ॥

विशेषो3पि तथैवाह योग्यो3यं नृपतेः सुतः ।

बातो2पि धर्मवान् राजा नृपासनिशहाईति ॥ 35 ॥

The minister-in-chief as well as the other members proposed that as Sudarśana is the son of the legal wife, calm and quiet, beautiful and endowed with all the royal qualifications, he is fit for the throne. Maharṣī Vasiṣṭha said, the royal son, though not attained to proper age is still religious; therefore he is really fit be installed as king on the royal throne.

कृते मन्मे मन्थिवृदैयुधाज्ञापा पाधिवः ।

तजाजगाम तरसा शुन्ता तृज्यिधीपिति: ॥ ३६ ॥

When the wise aged ministers thus decided, Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain, on hearing the decision hastened to the spot.

मृतं जामातरं शुना लीलावन्या: पिता तत् ।

तजाजगाम व्वितो दौहिजप्रियकायया ॥ ३७ ॥

He was the father of Līlāvatī; on hearing the demise of his son-in-law he came there, so that his daughter's son might get the kingdom.

वीरसेनस्तथा उसात: सुदर्भनहितेन्दिष्या ।

कलिलाधिपतिशेक मनोरामपिता नृप: ॥ 38 ॥

Next, Virasena, the king of the country of

Kalinga and the father of Manoramā, came there also with the object that his daughter's son Sudarśana be the Emperor.

उभौ ती सैन्यसंयुक्तो नृपो साध्यससंश्वितो ।

चक्रतुपनिमुखैसैर्निंग राजस्य कारणत् ॥ 39 ॥

The two kings, accompanied respectively by their own army and soldiers, began to counsel with the aged ministers, each trying so that his daughter's son may get the throne.

युधाजितु तदारूपछ्छज्येषुः कः सुतयोईयोः ।

राज्य प्राणोति ज्येषो वै न कनीयान्कदाचन ॥ 40 ॥

Yudhājit made the question: Who is the eldest of the two sons? Is it always the case that the eldest will inherit the kingdom? Will not the youngest ever be able to acquire it?

वीरसेनोप्रि तग्रह धर्मपन्सीरुत किल ।

राजाहं: स यथा राजज्ञास्त्रेन्यो मया श्रुन्ति ॥ 41 ॥

Virasena said: "O King! He who is the son of the legal wife inherits the kingdom; this I have heard from the learned who are proficient in the knowledge of the Śāstra".

युधाजित्नुगराहेदे ज्योड़ोर्ध च तथा गुणीः ।

राजलक्षणसंयुक्तो न त्वार्यं सुर्जनः ॥ 42 ॥

Hearing Virasena, Yudhājit repeated “Sudarśana is not so qualified with royal qualifications and other matters as this son of the late king, Śatrujit. How can then Sudarśana inherit the throne?”

विवादोउर सुसंपजो नृपयोस्तत लध्ययो: ।

कः: सदैहमपाकर्तुं क्षमः: स्यादितिबड़्टे ॥ 43 ॥

O King! Then quarrels ensued amongst the two kings. Now, at this critical juncture, who is able to solve their doubts?

युधाजीमन्त्रिण: प्राष युयं स्वार्थपरा: किल ।

सुदर्जनं नृपं कृत्वा धर्नं भोतुं किलेक्छंच ।। ४४ ॥।

Yudhajit then addressed the ministers: “You all are prompted by selfish ends; you want to acquire a good deal of money by making Sudarśana the king.

युषाकं तु तिचारोउयं मया ज्ञातत्थोङ्ग ।

सत्रुवित्सवलस्तस्मायमती चे नृपासने ॥ 4 5 ॥


मयि जीवित कः कुयात्कनीयांसं नृप किकल ।

स्वक्वा ज्येषे गुणाई च सेनया च सम्पत्नम् ॥ 46 ॥

I have come to know by your gestures and postures that your decision is to the above affect. After all, as Śatrujit possesses many more qualifications then Sudarsana, he has more claims to the throne; and, therefore, he is fit to occupy the throne and no other. Moreover, let me see as long as I live who can set aside the claims of a qualified prince, in possession of an army, and put forward the claims of a prince who has no qualifications at all.

नूरं सुखं करिष्यामि तस्मिन्बड्गास्य मेदिति ।

धारया च हिंधा भूयात्युषाकां तत्र का कथा ॥ 47 ॥

I am ready to fight and I will tear into two pieces by my sword. What more have you to say on this"?

वीरसेन्मुत तच्छूला युधाजितमभाषत ।

बातौ ती सूरिणज्ञों को घेदोउन विचारण ॥ 48 ॥

Hearing this, Virasena addressed Yudhajit “I see the two boy’s intelligence as the same. You are intelligent; kindly mention where is the difference?”

एवं विवद्यानौ ती संस्थितो नृपती तत् ।

प्रजाश्र ऋषयश्रेवे बभयुव्यंमानतः ॥ 49 ॥

O King! The two kings quarrelling with each other, remained there; the subject and the Rşis, seeing this, were very anxious.

समाजमूछ श्रापन्ताः समैयाः कलेशततयाः ।

विश्रां चाधिकांक्षितः परमयरमतंदिताः ॥ ५० ॥

Hundreds of tributary princes wanting that the two kings might be involved into quarrels with each other, came to the spot, with their soldiers, though they had to undergo great hardships in doing so.

निष्पाद हाययुतन श्रुब्रेसपुराओयः ।

राजज्वयमापहतुं मृतं शुचा महीपतिन् ॥ 51 ॥

Many aborigines, from the inhabitants of Śrīgavperur, hearing the demise of the late king, also appeared on the scene with the sole object to plunder.

पूत्री च बालकौ शुचा विगूहं च परस्यम् ।

चौरास्तर समाजमयुंरेणतनारवि ॥ 52 ॥

The two princes are minors; and hearing their parties at war with each other, many robbers from various adjoining countries came also there.

संमदन्त्र सड़ातः कलहें समुपस्थिते ।

युधापिज्ञीरमेन्य शुद्धकामी बध्वतुः ॥ 53 ॥

इति श्रीमद्धेंभागवते महापुराणो हृतीयकल्भं चतुर्वीरोअयायः ॥ 14 ॥

Thus when the war broke out between the two kings, the great confusion and tumult arose within the kingdoms; on the other hand, Yudhājit and Virasena both became ready to fight."

Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter on the narration of the glories of the Devi and the death of the Kosala

king Dhruva Sandhi in the Third Book of

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam.

Book III Chapter XV

