[Ch 14 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke: “O Dvija! I have heard in detail the Devi Yajña, performed by Śri Viṣṇu. Now describe Her Glory and glorious deeds. After hearing these, the Devi’s glorious deeds, I will also perform that, the best of all sacrifices. Thereby I will no doubt be pure through your favour.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Janamejaya spoke :-- O Dvīja! I have heard in detail the Devī Yajña, performed by Śrī Viṣṇu. Now describe Her Glory and glorious deeds. After hearing these, the Devī’s glorious deeds, I will also perform that, the best of all sacrifices. Thereby I will no doubt be pure through your favour.

[Ch 14 Verse 3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: “O King. Hear, I am describing to you the history of the most auspicious mighty deeds of the Devi, according to the Purānas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! Hear, I am describing to you the history of the most auspicious mighty deeds of the Devī, according to the Purāṇas.

[Ch 14 Verse 4-5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In days of yore, there reigned in the country of Kosala, King Dhruvasandhi of the Solar Dynasty. He was the son of Puspa and celebrated on account of his great prowess. He was truthful religious, engaged in doing good to his subjects, obeying the laws of the four castes and Śāramas. He being pure, performed his regal duties in the flourishing city of Ayodhyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In days of yore, there reigned in the country of Kosala, the king Dhruvasandhi of the Solar Dynasty. He was the son of Puṣpa and celebrated on account of his great prowess. He was truthful, religious, engaged in doing good to his subjects, obeying the laws of the four castes and Āśramas. He being pure, performed his regal duties in the flourishing city of Ayodhyā.

[Ch 14 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmanas, Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras and other good persons all lived religiously under his rule, each abiding by his own profession.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇas, Kṣattriyas, Vaiśyas, and Śūdras and other good persons all lived religiously under his rule, each abiding by his own profession.

[Ch 14 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No thieves, cheats, cunning persons, vain and arrogant persons treacherous and illiterate men were allowed to remain in his kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► No thieves, cheats, cunning persons, vain and arrogant persons, treacherous and illiterate men were allowed to remain in his kingdom.

[Ch 14 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Kurus! Thus ruling virtuously, the king had two wives, both of them young, fair and beautiful and well able to give delights and enjoyments to the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O host of Kurus! Thus ruling virtuously, the king had two wives, both of them young, fair and beautiful and well able to give delights and enjoyments to the king.

[Ch 14 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The first and lovely wife was Manoramā, and the second was Lilāvati. Both of them were exceedingly handsome, intelligent and qualified.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The first and lovely wife was Manoramā, and the second was Līlāvatī. Both of them were exceedingly handsome, intelligent and qualified.

[Ch 14 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king enjoyed much with them in palaces, gardens, romantic hills, lakes, and various beautiful mansions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king enjoyed much with them in palaces, gardens, romantic hills, lakes, and various beautiful mansions.

[Ch 14 Verse 11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the auspicious moment, Manoramā gave birth to a beautiful child, endowed with all royal qualifications. The child was named, in due course, Sudarśana.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the auspicious moment, Manoramā gave birth to a beautiful child, endowed with all royal qualifications. The child was named, in due course, Sudarśana.

[Ch 14 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next within one month, his second wife the fair Lilāvatī in the auspicious fortnight and in the auspicious day, gave birth to an excellent child.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next within one month, his second wife the fair Līlāvatī in the auspicious fortnight and in the auspicious day, gave birth to an excellent child.

[Ch 14 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King then performed the Jāta-Karma (ceremonies on the birth of a child) and being very glad, made lots of presents, wealth etc., to the Brāhmaṇas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King then performed the Jāta-Karma (ceremonies on the birth of a child) and being very glad, made lots of presents, wealth, etc., to the Brāhmaṇas.

[Ch 14 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The King shewed affection equally to the two children; never he made any distinction between them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The King shewed affection equally to the two children; never he made any distinction between them.

[Ch 14 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king, the tormenter of the foes, was very glad and performed duly the Cūdākarana ceremony according to his position and wealth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king, the tormenter of the foes, was very glad and performed duly the cuḍā karaṇa ceremony according to his position and wealth.

[Ch 14 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sight of these two sons delighted very much the people. Now seeing these Krtačūdas, and playing, the king was merged in the ocean of pleasure.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sight of these two sons delighted very much the people. Now seeing these Kritacūḍas, and playing, the king was merged in the ocean of pleasure.

[Ch 14 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana was the eldest; but Śatrujit, the second beautiful son by Lilāvatī was of sweet and persuasive speech. His beautiful figure and sweet words gave very much delight to the king, and for these qualities, the child Śatrujit turned out also a favourite of the people and ministers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana was the eldest; but Satrujit, the second beautiful son by Līlāvatī was of sweet and persuasive speech. His beautiful figure and sweet words gave very much delight to the king, and for these qualities, the child Satrujit turned out also a favourite of the people and ministers.

[Ch 14 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king could not show so much affection to the unfortunate Sudarśana as he shewed to Śatrujit.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king could not show so much affection to the unfortunate Sudarśana as he showed to Satrujit.

[Ch 14 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus some days having passed, one day King Dhruvasandhi went out on a hunting expedition to the forest. He killed in the forest many deer, Ruru (a kind of deer), elephants, boar, hare, buffaloes, rhinoceros, camels and amused himself very much with this hunting affair.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus some days having passed, one day the king Dhruvasandhi went out on an hunting expedition to the forest. He killed in the forest many deer, Ruru (a kind of deer), elephants, boar, hare, buffaloes, rhinoceros, camels and amused himself very much with this hunting affair.

[Ch 14 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While he was hunting thus, a lion got very much enraged, and, from a bush, suddenly jumped and came upon the king. That king of the beasts was already struck with arrows; now seeing the king in front, he loudly roared.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While he was hunting thus, a lion got very much enraged, and, from a bush, suddenly jumped and came upon the king. That king of the beasts was already struck with arrows; now seeing the king in front, he loudly roared.

[Ch 14 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He angrily lifted his long tail high up in the air and, puffing up his manes, jumped up high in the air to attack and to take the life of the king. Seeing this, instantly the king took sword in his right hand and shield in his left and stationed himself like another lion before him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He angrily lifted his long tail high up in the air and, puffing up his manes, jumped up high in the air to attack and to take the life of the king. Seeing this, instantly the king took sword in his right hand and shield in his left and stationed himself like another lion before him.

[Ch 14 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The king's followers, one and all, angrily shot arrows on the lion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The king’s followers, one and all, angrily shot arrows on the lion.

[Ch 14 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then a loud uproar ensued; and all began to hurl arrows as best as they could. But, after all, that dangerous lion fell upon the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then a loud uproar ensued; and all began to hurl arrows as best as they could. But, after all, that dangerous lion fell upon the king.

[Ch 14 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Seeing thus, the king struck him with his sword, but the lion also tore asunder the king, with his sharp nails. The king thus struck by the lion, fell on the spot and died. The soldiers cried aloud and killed the lion with arrows.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Seeing thus, the king struck him with his sword, but the lion also tore asunder the king, with his sharp nails. The king thus struck by the lion, fell on the spot and died. The soldiers cried aloud and killed the lion with arrows.

[Ch 14 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus both the king and lion lay dead on the spot; and the soldiers turned back to the palace and gave all the informations to the royal ministers. Śrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus both the king and lion lay dead on the spot; and the soldiers turned back to the palace and gave all the informations to the royal ministers.

[Ch 14 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the munis heard the demise of the king, they went to the forest, performed the burning of the dead body of the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the munis heard the demise of the king, they went to the forest, performed the burning of the dead body

[Ch 14 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Maharṣi Vasisṭha performed duly on the same spot, all the funeral ceremonies, thus ensuring the king the safe journey to the next world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha performed duly on the same spot, all the funeral ceremonies, thus ensuring the king the safe journey to the next world.

[Ch 14 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All the subject and the citizens and the Muni Vasisṭha counselled each other to install Sudarśana on the throne as the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All the subjects and the citizens and the Muni Vaśiṣṭha counselled each other to install Sudarśana on the throne as the king.

[Ch 14 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The minister-in-chief as well as the other members proposed that as Sudarśana is the son of the legal wife, calm and quiet, beautiful and endowed with all the royal qualifications, he is fit for the throne. Maharṣī Vasiṣṭha said, the royal son, though not attained to proper age is still religious; therefore he is really fit be installed as king on the royal throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The minister-in-chief as well as the other members proposed that as Sudarśana is the son of the legal wife, calm and quiet, beautiful and endowed with all the royal qualifications, he is fit for the throne. Maharṣi Vaśiṣṭha said, the royal son, though not attained to proper age is still religious; therefore he is really fit be installed as king on the royal throne.

[Ch 14 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the wise aged ministers thus decided, Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain, on hearing the decision hastened to the spot.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the wise aged ministers thus decided, Yudhājit, the king of Ujjain, on hearing the decision hastened to the spot.

[Ch 14 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was the father of Līlāvatī; on hearing the demise of his son-in-law he came there, so that his daughter's son might get the kingdom.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was the father of Līlāvatī; on hearing the demise of his son-in-law he came there, so that his daughter’s son might get the kingdom.

[Ch 14 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next, Virasena, the king of the country of Kalinga and the father of Manoramā, came there also with the object that his daughter's son Sudarśana be the Emperor.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next, Vīrasena, the king of the country of Kaliṅga and the father of Manoramā, came there also with the object that his daughter’s son Sudarśana be the Emperor.

[Ch 14 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two kings, accompanied respectively by their own army and soldiers, began to counsel with the aged ministers, each trying so that his daughter's son may get the throne.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two kings, accompanied respectively by their own army and soldiers, began to counsel with the aged ministers, each trying so that his daughter’s son may get the throne.

[Ch 14 Verse 40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yudhājit made the question: Who is the eldest of the two sons? Is it always the case that the eldest will inherit the kingdom? Will not the youngest ever be able to acquire it?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yudhājit made the question :-- “Who is the eldest of the two sons? Is it always the case that the eldest will inherit the kingdom? Will not the youngest ever be able to acquire it?”

[Ch 14 Verse 41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Virasena said: "O King! He who is the son of the legal wife inherits the kingdom; this I have heard from the learned who are proficient in the knowledge of the Śāstra".
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vīrasena said :-- O king! He who is the son of the legal wife inherits the kingdom; this I have heard from the learned who are proficient in the knowledge of the Śāstras.

[Ch 14 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Virasena, Yudhājit repeated “Sudarśana is not so qualified with royal qualifications and other matters as this son of the late king, Śatrujit. How can then Sudarśana inherit the throne?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Vīrasena, Yudhājit repeated “Sudarśana is not so qualified with royal qualifications and other matters as this son of the late king, Satrujit. How can then Sudarśana inherit the throne?”

[Ch 14 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Then quarrels ensued amongst the two kings. Now, at this critical juncture, who is able to solve their doubts?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Then quarrels ensued amongst the two kings. Now, at this critical juncture, who is able to solve their doubts?

[Ch 14 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Yudhajit then addressed the ministers: “You all are prompted by selfish ends; you want to acquire a good deal of money by making Sudarśana the king.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Yudhājit then addressed the ministers :-- “You all are prompted by selfish ends; you want to acquire a good deal of money by making Sudarśana the king.

[Ch 14 Verse 45-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have come to know by your gestures and postures that your decision is to the above affect. After all, as Śatrujit possesses many more qualifications then Sudarsana, he has more claims to the throne; and, therefore, he is fit to occupy the throne and no other. Moreover, let me see as long as I live who can set aside the claims of a qualified prince, in possession of an army, and put forward the claims of a prince who has no qualifications at all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have come to know by your gestures and postures that your decision is to the above affect. After all, as Satrujit possesses many more qualifications than Sudarśana, he has more claims to the throne; and therefore he is fit to occupy the throne and no other. Morever, let me see as long as I live who can set aside the claims of a qualified prince, in possession of an army, and put forward the claims of a prince who has no qualifications it all.

[Ch 14 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I am ready to fight and I will tear into two pieces by my sword. What more have you to say on this"?
NEW CORR ENG ──► I am ready to fight and I will tear the earth into two pieces by my sword. What more have you to say on this?”

[Ch 14 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, Virasena addressed Yudhajit “I see the two boy’s intelligence as the same. You are intelligent; kindly mention where is the difference?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, Vīrasena addressed Yudhājit “I see the two boy’s intelligence the same. You are intelligent; kindly mention where is the difference?”

[Ch 14 Verse 49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The two kings quarrelling with each other, remained there; the subject and the Rşis, seeing this, were very anxious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The two kings quarrelling with each other, remained there; the subjects and the Ṛṣis, seeing this, were very anxious.

[Ch 14 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hundreds of tributary princes wanting that the two kings might be involved into quarrels with each other, came to the spot, with their soldiers, though they had to undergo great hardships in doing so.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hundreds of tributary princes wanting that the two kings might be involved into quarrels with each other, came to the spot, with their soldiers, though they had to undergo great hardships in doing so.

[Ch 14 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Many aborigines, from the inhabitants of Śrīgavperur, hearing the demise of the late king, also appeared on the scene with the sole object to plunder.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Many aborigines, from the inhabitants of Sriṅgaverpur, hearing the demise of the late king, also appeared on the scene with the sole object to plunder.

[Ch 14 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The two princes are minors; and hearing their parties at war with each other, many robbers from various adjoining countries came also there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The two princes are minors; and hearing their parties at war with each other, many robbers from various adjoining countries came also there.

[Ch 14 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus when the war broke out between the two kings, the great confusion and tumult arose within the kingdoms; on the other hand, Yudhājit and Virasena both became ready to fight." Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter on the narration of the glories of the Devi and the death of the Kosala king Dhruva Sandhi in the Third Book of Śrimaddevībhāgavatam.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus when the war broke out between the two kings, the great confusion and tumult across within the kingdoms; on the other hand, Yudhājit and Vīrasena both became ready to fight. Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter on the narration of the glories of the Devī and the death of the Kosala king Dhruva Sandhi in the
