CHAPTER IV

On the Hymns to the Devi

ब्रहोाच

इत्युक्त्वा भगवान्विणु: पुनराह जनंद्नः ।

वयं गच्छेम पार्षेडस्या: प्रणमन्तः पुनः: पुनः ॥ 1 ॥

Brahmā said: “Thus speaking, Bhagavān Janārdana Viṣṇu spoke to me again: ‘Come; let us bow down to Her again and again and let us go to Her.

सेयं वरा महामाया दास्यल्येच वरान्ह नः ।

सुखामः सर्हिधि प्राय पिभयाश्रणानिके ॥ 2 ॥

We shall reach at Her feet fearlessly and we will chant hymns to Her; Mahā Māyā will be pleased with us and will grant us boons.

यदि नो वारयिध्यन्ति द्वारस्या: परिचारका: ।

पटिष्यामश्र तनरक्षा:सनुर्ति तेल्या: समाहितः ॥ 3 ॥

If the guards at the entrance prevent us from going, we would stand at the gate way and we chant hymns to the Devi with one mind.'”

बढ्रोवाच

इत्युक्ते हरिणा वावसे सुप्रहही सुसंशित्यों ।

जातौ प्रमुदिति कामं निकटे गमानय च ॥ 4 ॥

Brahmā said: 'When Hari addressed us in the above way, we two became choked by intense feelings of joy; our voice became tremulous and we waited there for some time; our hearts were elated with joy to go to Her.

ओभिम्बुकला हाँर सर्वे विमानाचरिताक्रयः ।

उत्तीर्ण निर्णत हारि शुक्रभाना मनस्वलम् ॥ 5 ॥

We then, accepted Hari's word, said "Om" and got down from our car and went with hastened steps and with fear to the gate.

हारस्थावीक्ष्य तान्सर्विन्देवी भगवती तदा ।

सितं कृत्वा चकारागु तोक्षीन्कीसफधारिणः ॥ 6 ॥

Seeing us standing at the gateway, Devi Bhagavati smiled and within an instant transformed us three into females.

वर्ये चुवतयो जाता: सुस्पाश्राकृष्णग: ।

विसर्यें परमं प्राता गताततसंनिधिं पुनः ॥ 7 ॥

We looked beautiful and youthful women, adorned with nice ornaments; thus we greatly wondered and went to Her.

सा सुह्यान न स्थितांसतर कौकीपंशरणानिके ।

व्यलोकयत चार्वीगं प्रोमस्पूर्णया चुगा ॥ 8 ॥

Seeing us standing at Her feet in feminine forms, the beautiful Devi Bhagavatí, looked upon us with eyes of affection.

प्रणय तां महादेवीं पुस्तः संस्थिता वयम् ।

परस्यं लोकंयतः क्लीक्याग्राकृष्णपुण: ॥ 9 ॥

We then bowed to the great Devi, looked at one another and stood before Her in that feminine dress.

पादपीठे प्रेक्षमाणा नानागधिगिवृषितम् ।

सुर्यकोटिप्रतीकारां श्वित्तास्त्र वयं ययः ॥ 10 ॥

We three, then, began to see the pedestal of the great Devi, shining with the 'justre of ten million Suns and decorated with various gems and jewels.

कांधिउक्तांबरास्त्र सहचर्य: सहस्रतः ।


कांधिउर्जीलांव गार्थतव्या पीतावम्बा: शुभाः ॥  १ १ ॥

We next discerned that thousands and thousands of attendants are waiting on Her.

देव्य: सर्वा: शुभाकारा विविधायम्पुर्णतः ।

विरेजुः पार्थतस्तव्या: परिवर्षापरा: किल ॥ १ २ ॥

जगुळ नन्तुळान्या पर्पुपासंन्त ताः स्थितः ।

वीणामास्तबाघानि वाद्यंतीं पूदान्तिज्ञा: ॥ १ ३ ॥

Some of them are wearing red dress; some blue dress, some yellow dress; thus the Deva girls, variously dressed were serving Her and standing by Her side.

शूणु नातर वक्ष्यामि यद्धुर्द तक चाब्धुतम् ।

नखदर्पर्णमध्ये  शे देथ्याशरणपंक्ने ॥ 14 ॥

They were dancing, singing on and playing with musical instruments and were gladly chanting hymns in praise of the Devi. O Nārada! We saw there another wonderful thing.

ब्रहाण्डवगितृलं सर्वे तन स्थावरजंभम् ।

अर्ह विद्युष्ठा रुद्ध्य वायुरनियोये रोच : ॥ १ ५ ॥

वरण: शीतगुस्त्ब्वटा कुवेर: पाकशासन: ।

पर्वतः सागरा नचो गाध्वांपरसस्तथा ॥ १ ६ ॥

विश्वासुश्रिक्रजेकृतः श्रोतश्रिंगावस्तथा ।

नारदस्वैकुश्छीश हाहाहूहलसेव च ॥ 17 ॥

अधिनी वसव: साध्या: सिद्धाश्व पितरस्तथा ।

नाना: शेणावय: सर्वे किजरोरगारक्षसा: ॥ 18 ॥

वैकुंठी बढ़ालोकढ़ कैलास: पर्वतींतपम: ।

सर्वे तद्विजलं चूई नखमध्यस्थितं च तत ॥ 19 ॥

Listen. We saw the whole universe, moving and non-moving within the nails of the lotus feet of the Devi. We saw there myself, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Vāyu, Agni, Yama, Moon, Sun, Varuna, Tvaṣṭā, Indra, Kubera and other Devas, Apsarās, Gandharvas, rivers, oceans, mountains, Viśvāvasus, Citraketu, Śveta, Citrāngada, Nārada, Tumburu, Hā Hā Hū Hū and other Gandharvas, the two Aśvins, the eight Vasus, Sādhyas, Siddhas, the Pitts, Ananta and other Nāgas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Rākṣasas, the abode of Vaikuntīha, the adode of Brahmā, Kailāsa mountain, the best of all mountains; all were existing there. Within that nail of the toe were, reflected all the things of the Universe.

मज्ञमपंकंज तस स्थितोई चतुरान्नः ।

शेषशागी जगात्रावस्थता च मधुक्रटभी ॥ 20 ॥

The lotus whence I was born, the four-faced

Brahmā like myself on that lotus, Bhagavān Jagannātha lying on that bed of Ananta, the two Demons Madhu-Kaitābha, all I saw there.

श्रीभगवान्वाच

एवं दृष्टं मया तत्र पायद्यान्ये स्थितम् ।

विस्मतीड़ं ततो वीक्ष्य किमेनेविरि शक्ति: ॥ 21 ॥

विष्णुधि विस्मायाविषः: शक्रृषच तथा स्थितः ।

तां तदा मेनेत देवी वयं विक्षय मात्मम् ॥ 22 ॥

Seeing all these wonderful things within the nails of Her lotus feet, I became greatly surprised and thought timidly: “What are all these?” My companions Viṣṇu and Śaṅkara were struck with wonder. We three then, made out that She was our Mother of the universe.

ततो वर्षेगतं पूर्णं व्यतितानं प्रपश्यतः ।

सुधामये शिव हीपे विहृतं विहितं चि ।। २३ ॥

सख्य इव तत तत मेनेरिस्मानविशलान् ।

देव्यः प्रमुदिताकारा नानाभरणयमिष्ठतः ॥ 24 ॥

Thus full one hundred years passed away in seeing the various glories of the Devi in the auspicious nectar-like Mani Dvipa; as long we were there, Her attendants, the Deva girls adorned with various ornaments gladly considered us as Sakhís.

वयमध्यतिरयन्ताद्वर्षभूमिव विमोहिताः ।

प्रनटमनसः सर्वे पश्यन्यावन्मनोराम्न् ॥ 25 ॥

We, too, were greatly fascinated by their enchanting gestures and postures. For that reason, we saw always their beautiful movements with great gladness.

एकदा ता महादेवीं देर्वीं शीभुवनेश्वीम् ।

तुशाव भगवानिष्यापुर्वनीभावसंश्रितः ॥ 26 ॥

Once, on an occasion, Bhagavān Viṣṇu, while He was in that feminine form, chanted hymns in praise of the great Devi Śrī Bhuvaneśvari.

श्रीभगवानुवाच

नमो देख्ये प्रकृत्ये च विधान्ये सत्तं नमः ।

कल्याणे कामादये च दृष्टिसिद्धो नमोनमः ॥ 27 ॥

Śrī Bhagavān said: “Salutation to Devi Prakrti, the Creatrix; I bow down again and again to Thee.

Thou art all-auspicious and grantest the desires of Thy devotees; Thou art of the nature of Siddhi (success) and Vrddhi (increase) I bow down again and again to Thee.

सच्चिदानंदरूणिये संसारागणे नमः ।

पझकृत्यविद्धायै ते भुवनेश्ये नामोनम: ॥ 28 ॥

I bow down to the World Mother, Who is of the nature of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. O Devi! Thou createst, preservest and destroyest this Universe; Thou dost the Pralaya (the great Dissolution) and showest favour to the created beings. Thus Thou art the Authoress of the above five-fold things that are done; so, O Bhuvanesvari, I bow down to Thee!

स्वाधिष्टानस्वाधी कूटस्थाये नामोनः ।

अधमात्रार्थभृतार्थ हृतलेखये नामोनः ॥ 29 ॥

Thou art the great efficient and material cause of the changeful. Thou art the Unchangeable, Immovable Consciousness; Thou art the half letter (Ardhamātrā), Hrllekhā (the consciousness that ever pervades both inside and outside the Universe); Thou art the Supreme Soul and the individual soul. Salutation again and again to Thee.

ज्ञात मया प्रतिज्ञिमंदं त्वये सर्जिश्रिंह

तत्तोउस्य सम्भवयावधि मातरह।

गर्निक्छे तेउस्य करणे चिततग्रभावा

ज्ञातप्रयाना सकललोकमयीति नृनम् ॥ 30 ॥

O Mother! I now realise fully well that this whole Universe rests on Thee; it rises from Thee and again melts away in Thee. The creation of this Universe shews Thy infinite force. Verily, Thou art become Thyself all these Lokas (regions).

वित्तार्थं सर्वमिखितं सर्वसद्धिकारं

सन्दर्शयस्यविकलं पुरुषाय काले ।

तत्प्रेश्य प्रोडशणीयेव च सत्पशिष्य

भार्यस्ट्रजालयि नः किल रंजनाय ॥ 31 ॥

During the time of creation Thou createst the two formless elements Akāsa and Vāyu and the three elements with form, fire, water, and earth; then with these Thou createst the whole Universe

and shewest this to the Enjoyer Puruṣa, who is of the nature of consciousness, for His satisfaction. Thou again dost become the material cause of the twentythree Tattvas, Mahat, etc., as enumerated in the Sānkhya system and appear to us like mirage.

न त्वामुते किमयि वसुगत विष्याति

व्यायैव सर्वमिखलं त्वमविश्यतासि ।

गर्निक विंना व्यवहतो पुरुषो3यणत्को

बंभपयते जननि बुद्धिमता जनेन ॥ 32 ॥

“O Mother! Were it not for Thee, no object would be visible. Thou pervadest the whole Universe. It is for this reason that those persons that are wise declare that even the Highest Puruṣa can do no work without Thy aid.

प्राणासि विश्वामिखतं सन्तं प्रपाते:

स्वैतेनजसा च सकलं प्रकटीकांशीव ।

अत्येव देवि तरसा किल करलकाले

को वेद देवि चरितं तव वे भयस्य ॥ 33 ॥

O Devi! Thou createst and art giving satisfaction to the whole Universe by Thy power; again at the time of Pralaya Thou swallowest forcibly all these that are seen. So, O Devi! Who can Fathom Thy powers?

त्राता वयं जननि ते मधुकैटभाण्यं

लोकाश्र ते सुवितता: खलु दर्शिता ते ।

नीता: सुखस्य भवने परमां च कोर्टि

यहर्जनं तव भवानि महाप्राभावम् ॥ 34 ॥

O Mother! Thou didst save us from the hands of Madhu and Kaitabha. Then Thou hast brought us to this Mani Dvipa and shewed us Thy own form, all these extended regions and immense powers and given us exquisite delight and joy. This is the highest place of happiness.

नाहं भवो न च विलिपि विवेद मातः

को3:0 नी हे वेति चरितं तब तुर्दिंभाव्यम् ।

कानीह संति घुवन्तिन महाप्रभावे

श्रीमभवामि रचिते रचनाकलापे ॥ 35 ॥

“O Mother! When I Myself, Śaṅkara and Brahmā or any one of us is unable to fathom Thy

Book III Chapter IV

inconceivable glory, who else can then ascertain? O Bhavānī! Who knows, how many more than the several regions that we saw reflected in thy nails of Thy feet, exist in Thy creation.

अस्माधिरत्र भुवने हरिन्य एव

दृष्टः शिवः कमलजः प्रधितम्भावः ।

अन्येषु देये धुवनेषु न सोल किं ते

किं विश्व देये वित्ततं तल सुप्रभावम् ॥ 36 ॥

O One endowed with infinitely great powers! O Devi! we saw another Viṣṇu, another Hara, another Brahmā, all of great celebrity in the Universe exhibited by Thee; who knows how many other such Brahmās etc. exist in Thy other Universes! Thy glory is infinite.

यावोउव तेंत्रिकमलं प्रणिप्पल क्रांप

घिते सदा वस्तु रूपमिदं तरोतत ।

नागरि वक्सकुहरे सततं तवैव

सन्दर्भनं तव पदांजुवणोः सदैव ॥ 37 ॥

O Mother! I bow down again and again to Thy lotus feet and pray to Thee that may Thy this form exist always in my mind. May my mouth always utter Thy name and may my two eyes see always Thy lotus feet.

भूतयोउयमिति सत्तां मीय पावनीयं

त्वां स्वामितीति मनसा ननु चिंशतयामि ।

एषासउवयोरितता किले देयि

भूयाड्वापिति: सदैव जननी सुतयोरिवार्थ || 38 ||

O Revered One! May I remember Thee as my Goddess and may'st Thou constantly look on myself as Thy humble servant. O Mother! What more shall I say than this: May this relation as mother and son always exist between Thee and me.

त्वे वेति सर्वमितिवर्ग भुवनप्रपंच

सर्वन्ता परिसमापितिनतनभूमि: ।

किं पाभरेण जानंद्र विनेद्रीयं

यदुक्तभावर भवाति तर्वितं स्यात् ॥ 39 ॥

O World-Mother! There is nothing in this world that is not known to Thee for Thou art omniscient. So, O Bhavānī! What more shall my humble self declare to Thee! Now dost Thou do whatever Thou desirest.

ब्रहा सुजल्यवति विद्युभ्यापतिश्र

संहारकाकर इयं तु जन प्रसिद्धि: ।

किं सत्यमेतदापि देयि तवेच्छया वे कर्तु

भूमा वयवजे तत शक्तिसुक्तः ॥ 40 ॥

O Devi! rumour goes that Brahmā is the creator, Viṣṇu is the Preserver, and Maheśvara is the Destroyer! Is this true? O Eternal One! It is through Thy Will power, through Thy force, that we create, preserve and destroy.

धात्री घरायसुते न जगद्धिभर्ति

अधारणशक्तिरखिलं तव वे विधर्भर्ति ।

सूर्योंसि भाति वरदे प्रभया युतस्ते

तं वं समीन्दित्वि लिंवरा विभागसि ॥ 41 ॥

O Daughter of the Himalaya mountain! The earth is supporting this Universe; it is Thy endless might that is holding all this made of five elements. O Grantress of boons! It is through Thy power and lustre that Sun is lustrous and becomes visible. Though Thou art the attributeless Self, yet by Thy Māyic power Thou appearest in the form of this Prapañca Universe.

ब्रह्मा उद्गमीधारय: किलत ते प्रभावासर्वे

वयं जनियुता न यदा तु नित्या: ।

के3-ये सुरा: शाममखप्रमुखाश्र नित्या

नित्या त्वयेव जननी प्रकृति: पुराणा ॥ 42 ॥

When Brahma, Maheśa, and I myself take birth by Thy power and are not eternal, what more can be said of Indra and other Devas than this that they are mere temporary things and created. It is only Thou that art Eternal, Ancient Prakṛti and the Mother of this Universe.

लं चेद्रवानि दयसे पुरुषं पुराणं

जानेउद्धमव तव संनिधित्यः सदैव ।

नोद्रेदं विषुर्नादिर्नीह इंगो

विश्वात्मधीरिति तमः प्रकृति: सदैव ॥ 43 ॥

O Bhavānī! Now I realise from my remaining with Thee, that it is Thou that dost impart, out of mercy, the Brahma vidyā to the ancient Puruṣa; and thus He can realise His eternal nature. Otherwise, He will remain always under delusion that He is the Lord, He is the Puruṣa without

beginning, that He is good and the Universal Soul, and thus suffers under various forms of egoism (Aharikāra).

विद्या त्वमेव ननु बुद्धिमतां नराणां

शक्तिस्वमेव किल शक्तिज्ञातं सदैव ।

त्वं कीर्तिकान्तिकमतामतनुहिष्ठपा

भृत्तिप्रदा विरतितेव मनुष्यलोकें ॥ 4 4 ॥

Thou art the Vidya of the intelligent persons and the Śakti of the beings endowed with force; Thou art Kirti (fame), Kānti (lustre), Kamālā (wealth) and the spotless Tuṣṭi (peace, happiness). Amongst men, Thou art the dispassion, leading to Mukti (complete freedom from bondage).

गायशसि प्रथमवेदकला त्यमेव

स्वाहा स्थभा भगवती सगुणाधेमात्रा ।

आनाम यह एव हितीते निगमो भवल्यै

संजीवनाय सत्तं सुरपूर्वजानाम् ॥ 4 5 ॥

Thou art the Gāyatri, the mother of the Vedas; and Thou art Svāhā, Svadhā, etc. Thou art the Bhagavati, of the nature of the three Gunas; Thou art the half mātrā (half the upper stroke of a letter), the fourth state, transcending the Gunas.

मोक्षायीयेव रचयस्यलिङ्ग पप्रड़े तेषां

राता: खलु यतो ननु जीवभावम् ।

अंगा अनाविनिधान्य किलानायस्य

पूर्णाणैवस्य वित्ता हिं यथा तर्गाः ॥ 46 ॥

It is Thou that givest always the Śāstras for the preservation of the Devas and the Brāhmanas. It is Thou that hast expanded and manifested this whole phenomenon of the visible Universe for the liberation of the embodied souls (Jivas), the parts of the pure holy Brahman, the Full, the Beginningliness, the Deathless, forming the waves of the Infinite expanse of ocean.

जीवो यदा तु परिवेत्त तदैव कृत्वं

लं संहरस्यविज्ञमेवतिति प्रसिद्धम् ।

नाटवं नटेन चित्तं वित्वेप्रतनोंरे

कार्य कृते विरमसे प्रधितप्रभावा ॥ 47 ॥

When the Jiva comes to know internally and becomes thoroughly conscious that all this is Thy work, Thou createst and destroyest, that all this is Thy Māyic pastime, false, like the parts of an actor in a theatrical play, then and then only he desists for ever from his part in this Theatre of world. O Mother! O Destroyer of the greatest difficulties! I always take refuge unto Thee.

ज्ञाता त्वमेव मम मोहमयाद्वावधे-

स्वामविक्से सततंभिय माहृतिंदे च ।

रागादिधिर्विरिचिते तिथवे किलाने

मायेव पाहि बहुतुःखको च काले ॥ 48 ॥

Thou dost save me from this ocean of Sarinśāra, full of Moha (delusion). Let Thou be my Saviour when my end will come, from these infinitely troublesome and unreal pains arising from love and hatred.

नमो देयि महाविद्यो नामामि चरणी तत ।

सदा ज्ञानप्रकाशे मे देयि स्वार्थंदि शिले ॥ 49 ॥

श्री श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे तृतीयकल्पे

वतुर्षोड्यायः 11 4 11

Obeisance to Thee! O Devi! O Mahāvidyā! I fall prostrate at Thy feet. O Thou, the Giver of all desires! O Auspicious One! Dost Thou give the knowledge that is All-Light to Me."

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of the Third Book on the hymns to the Great Devi by Visnu in the Mahāpurāna Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

