CHAPTER XII

On the Dvipas

नारायण उवाच

नम्बुद्वीपो यथा चार्यं यद्यमाणेन कीर्तिनः ।

तालता सर्वतः क्षारोद्धिना परिवेहितः ॥ १ ॥

जंबाख्येन यथा मेस्तशा क्षारोद्केन च ।

क्षारोद्धिस्तु द्विगुण: प्लक्षाख्योनेपवेहितः ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: The Jambudvīpa has been described, how it is and what is its width. It is surrounded on all sides by the salt ocean. As Meru is surrounded by Jambudvīpa, so the salt ocean is surrounded by Plaksadvipa, twice its size.

वर्षेवधरित्रा बाह्योपवेल ने हेधन्ते ।

लक्षाख्य श्वयं नज्यप्रमाणो जीप्रलपधूक् ॥ 3 ॥

हिरण्यपोर्जनसत्रेव तिहतीति विभिश्रयः ।

प्रियतातमजस्त्र सप्तिजिक़ इति सभूत: ॥ 4 ॥

As the ditch is surrounded by gardens, so the salt ocean is surrounded by gardens. As the Jambu tree exists in Jambudvipa, so the Plakṣa tree exists in the Plakṣa Dvipa and of the same size. The name Plakṣa Dvipa is derived from the name of this Plakṣa tree. This tree is of a golden colour.

अनिनस्तदीपनिर्वल्पप्रिक्र: स्वं त्रीपेवे च ।

विभज्य सत वर्षाणि स्वपुत्रेष्यो द्दो विषु: ॥ 5 ॥

स्वयामात्मविदां मान्यां योगचर्यां समाश्रितः ।

तेनेच चाचमयोगेन भगवंतमुपगानतः ॥ 6 ॥

Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. This is named Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island is Idhmajihva, the son of Priyavrata. He divided his island into the seven Varsas and distributed them to each of his seven sons and he himself took refuge of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers of Self and he got the Bhagavān Vāsudeva.

शिवं च यवसं घरं शान्तं क्षमागृते तथा ।

अभयं चेति स्पर्वेल तद्धपिंगि संदक्षताम् ॥ ७ ॥

तेषु प्रोक्ता नदीः सदा पिशयः सदा चंद हिं ।

अरणा नृणपांगिरसी साविकी सुप्रभातिका ॥ ८ ॥

ऋतंभगर सत्यंभरा इति नदा: प्रक्रसितितः ।

मणिकुटो वजूकट उन्सेनेतत्यैच च ॥ ९ ॥

ज्योतिष्यानै सुपर्णश्छ हित्यणघीव एव च ।

मेघमाल इति खलाता: पल्बहूपत्य पर्वताः ॥ 10 ॥

The names of these seven Dvipas are: Śiva, Yavas, Subhadra, Śānti, Kṣema, Amrta, and Abhaya. Seven rivers and seven mountains exist respectively in the seven islands. The rivers are: Arunā, Nārmnā, Anigirasi, Śavitri, Suprabhātikā,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Rtambharā, and Satyambharā. The names of the mountains are Manjikūta, Vajrakūta Indrasena, Jyotiṣmāna, Supraṇa, Hiranyasthiva, and Meghamāla.

नदीनां जलमाजेण दर्जनस्पर्नानदिधि: ।

निर्मूतोगेघरजसो निस्तमस्का: प्रजास्तथा || 1 1 ||

इसश्रैव पतंगश्र ऊर्धयान इतिथ च ।

सल्यानसंज्ञाङ्ठावतो वर्णा: पल्षस्य द्वीपके || 12 ||

The seeing and drinking the waters of these rivers take away all sins and all darkness due to ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, Pataṅga. Ürdhvāyana, and Satyāṅga, corresponding to the four casts Brāhmaṇa, etc. The inhabitants of this Plakṣa Dvīpa live for one thousand years; and all are of variegated wonderful appearances.

सहसावुःप्रमाणणश विविधोपमदर्गना: ।।

स्वर्गात्रं ज्योविद्याविधितफक्ते यजिते ते ।। 13 ॥

प्रत्नस्य विष्णो रूपं च सन्तर्देन च ब्रहणः ।

अमृतस्य च मृत्योक्ष सूर्यमातनामीमाति ॥ १४ ॥

लक्षाप्रदि च सर्वेषु पछत्रीपेणु नारद ।

आयुर्विरिद्यमोजक शक्तं बुद्धि: सहो5ति च ॥ १ ५ ॥

They follow the customs and usages dictated by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the worship is done is this: We take refuge unto that Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of the Ancient Person Viṣṇu and Who is the Ordainer of Satya (Truth), Rtā (Straight forwardness), Brahma, Amṛta (Immortality) and Mṛtyu (Death).

विक्रम: सर्वतीकाना सिद्धिर्यतिनकी सव।

लक्ष्रक्षीपार्वे चेक्षुरसोदः सरितां पति: ॥ १६ ॥

लक्ष्रक्षीयं समयं च परिवार्यवितिष्ठते ।

गत्मताख्यततो द्वीधासामद्विकृणावितर: ॥ १ ७ ॥

O Nārada! All the persons here live long, of vigorous senses, energetic, powerful, intelligent, enthusiasts and valorous; everyone gets extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this Plakṣa Dvipa is the Iksu Ocean. This Iksu Sagara surrounds the Plakṣa Dvipa. Next comes Sālmala Dvipa. It is twice as large as Plakṣa.

समानेन सुरोदेन सिंधुना परिवेहितः ।

यत्र वै शामलनीयुक्षः एलक्षायाम प्रक्रितितः ॥ 18 ॥

स्थानं तत्वक्षिरातस्य गकड़स्य महात्मनः ।

तस्य द्वीपस्य नाथे हि यज्ञाहुः प्रियन्ता् ॥ १९ ॥

This Dvipa is surrounded by Surāsāgara (the ocean of wine). There is a tree named Sālmali in this island, which is as large as the Plakṣa tree. The high-souled Garuda resides on that tree. Yajñabāhu is the Ruler of this place.

जातः स एस सतप्यः स्वपुजेप्यो ददो धाग् ।

तद्धरणीं च नामानि कथितानि निवोधित ॥ 20 ॥

सुरोचनं सौमनस्यं रामणं देववर्षकम् ।

Varspeid तथा चाचायवनं विज्ञानामकम् ॥ 21 ॥

He was born of Priyavrata; he divided his Varsapinto the seven parts and distributed each of them to his seven sons respectively. Now hear the names of these Varsas: Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramana, Deva Varsa, Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana, and Vijñāta. Seven mountains and seven rivers exist there respectively.

तेषु वर्षाद्रयः सप्त सपैल सरितः स्मृतः ।

सरसः शतशर्गश्व वामदेवक्ष कंदकः ॥ 22 ॥

कुमुदः पुष्पवर्षे सहस्वश्रतिवे च ।

एते च पर्वतः सप्त नदीनामिन चोच्यते ॥ 23 ॥

The names of the mountains are: Sarasa, Śataśṛṅga, Vāma Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda, Puṣpavarsa, and Sahasra-Śruti. Now hear the names of the rivers.

अनुभाले: सिनीवाली सरस्वती कुटुस्णा ।

रजनी चैव नन्दा च राकेति परिकीर्तितः ॥ 24 ॥

तद्वर्भुपुचाः सर्वे चातुर्वेधसमाढ़ाः ।

श्रुतप्रो वीर्धयो वसुंधर इष्ट्यभरः ॥ 25 ॥

Anumati, Sinīvāli, Sarasvati, Kūhu, Rajanī, Nandā, and Rākā; these are the seven rivers. The people are divided into the four castes: Śrutadhara, Viryadhara, Vasundhara, Iśundhara. These correspond to the Brāhmanas, etc.

भपातं वेदमयं वजते सोमधीक्षाम ।

स्वगोंषि: पितृदेवेष्यो विभजन्कृष्णगयुकलयोः ॥ 26 ॥

सर्वासां च प्रजानां च राजा सेभः प्रसीद्रु।

एवं सुरोदाद्विगुण: स्वमानेन प्रकीर्तितः ॥ 27 ॥

Book VIII Chapter XIII

They worship the Bhagavān Moon, the Controller of all and the Creator of all the Vedas. They offer food duly in the black and white fortnight to their Pitrs The mantra for their worship is: 'Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.' O Nārada! Next to Surāsāgara is Kuśadvīpa, surrounded by Ghrtaṣāgara (the ocean of clarified butter).

भृतोदेनावृत: सोउयं कुशहीप: प्रकाशते ।

यममानते कुशलावो द्वीपल्यकाणो ज्वन्त् ॥ 28 ॥

स्वाग्यरोचिभा काहा भासव्यमतितिह्न ।

हिरण्योतास्तद्वीपपति: प्रैयन्त: स्वाद् ॥ 29 ॥

Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades of Kuśa grass, of a very resplendent colour. The name of the Dvīpa is from this Kuśastamba. This bundle of Kuśa, illumines all the quarters with their gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvīpa is Hiranyaretā, the son of Priyavrata.

स्वपुःप्यश्व सनच्यस्तद्वीपं सनधाउपबन्त।

वसुश्व वसुवानश तथा दृढ़चिच: परः ॥ 30 ॥

नाभिगुपत्स्तुच्यन्ते विविफ्नामदेवकों ।

तेषां वर्षेषु सदैव सीमाशिरिवरा: स्मृता: ॥ 31 ॥

He divided the Dvipa into seven parts and distributed each of them to each of his seven sons respectively. The name of the seven sons are: Vasu, Vasudāna, Drgharuci, Nābhigupta, Sutyavrata Vivikta, and Bhāmadevaka.

नच: सदैव संतीह ततामानि निवोधात ।

चक्रतथा चतु:शृना: कपिलश्रिकूटक: ॥ 32 ॥

देवानीकशोयंरीना प्रविण: सप्त पर्वता: ।

सकुल्या मधुकुल्या मिजरिविंदा तवैच च ॥ 33 ॥

There are seven mountains forming the seven boundaries and so are the seven rivers. Hear the names of these. The names of the mountains are:

Cakra, Catuhśrṅga, Kapila, Cirtre Devānika, Kūta, Ürdhvaromā and Dravina. The names of the rivers are:

श्रुतविंदा देवगर्भा धुतच्युर्मदामतिके ।

यत्योपिभः कुशहीघवासिनः सर्वे एत ते ॥ 34 ॥

कुशलः कोविद्धेशाव्याभिशुक्तलये च ।

कुलकडील संज्ञाभिश्रतुर्वर्गोः प्रकर्जिततः ॥ 35 ॥

Rasakulyā, Madhukulyā, Mitravindā Śrutavindā, Devagarbhā, Ghrṭācyut, and Mantramālikā. The inhabitants of the Kuśadvīpa drink the waters of these rivers. There are the four castes here Kuśala, Kovida. Abhiyukta and Kulaka corresponding to the Brāhmaṇas, etc.

जातसेवास्करं ते देवं कर्मजकोशलेः ।

यजते देववर्षिभाः सर्वे सर्विविदो जना: ॥ 36 ॥

परस्य ब्रहणा: साक्षाज्जानवेदोर्भि हृव्यवाद् ।

देवानां पुरुकारानां यजेन पुरुयं यज ।

एवं वजते जलनं सर्वे द्वीपाधित्यासिनः ॥ 37 ॥

श्रिति शीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणोडगमकल्ये

इदारो3धाया: 11 12 11

They are all powerful like Indra and the other chief Devas; and all of them are omniscient. They worship the Fire God and perform various good works in honour of Him. Their mantra is this: 'O Fire! Thou carriest the oblations direct to Para Brahma. In the sacrifices of the Devas, Thou worshippest that Personal God and offerest to Him whatever are given in oblations, mentioning the respective limbs of His Body. Thus the inhabitants of that Dvipa worship the Fire God.

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of Plakşa, Sâlmala, and Kuša Dvipas in the Mahāpurānam, Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XIII

