[Ch 12 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: The Jambudvīpa has been described, how it is and what is its width. It is surrounded on all sides by the salt ocean. As Meru is surrounded by Jambudvīpa, so the salt ocean is surrounded by Plaksadvipa, twice its size.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- The Jambudvīpa has been described, how it is and what is its width. It is surrounded on all sides by the salt ocean. As Meru is surrounded by Jambudvīpa, so

[Ch 12 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the ditch is surrounded by gardens, so the salt ocean is surrounded by gardens. As the Jambu tree exists in Jambudvipa, so the Plakṣa tree exists in the Plakṣa Dvipa and of the same size. The name Plakṣa Dvipa is derived from the name of this Plakṣa tree. This tree is of a golden colour.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the ditch is surrounded by gardens, so the salt ocean is surrounded by gardens. As the Jambu tree exists in Jambudvīpa, so the Plakṣa tree exists in the Plakṣa Dvīpa and of the same size. The name Plakṣa Dvīpa is derived from the name of this Plakṣa tree. This tree is of a golden colour.

[Ch 12 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. This is named Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island is Idhmajihva, the son of Priyavrata. He divided his island into the seven Varsas and distributed them to each of his seven sons and he himself took refuge of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers of Self and he got the Bhagavān Vāsudeva.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. This is, named Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island is Idhmajihva, the son of Priyavrata. He divided his island into the seven Varṣas and distributed them, to each of his seven sons and he himself took refuge of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers of Self and he got the Bhagavān Vāsudeva.

[Ch 12 Verse 7-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The names of these seven Dvipas are: Śiva, Yavas, Subhadra, Śānti, Kṣema, Amrta, and Abhaya. Seven rivers and seven mountains exist respectively in the seven islands. The rivers are: Arunā, Nārmnā, Anigirasi, Śavitri, Suprabhātikā, Rtambharā, and Satyambharā. The names of the mountains are Manjikūta, Vajrakūta Indrasena, Jyotiṣmāna, Supraṇa, Hiranyasthiva, and Meghamāla.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The names of those seven Dvīpas are :-- Śiva, Yavas, Subhadra, Sānti, Kṣema, Amrita, and Abhaya. Seven rivers and seven mountains exist respectively in the seven islands. The rivers are :-- Aruṇā, Nrimnā, Aṅgirasī, Sāvitrī, Suprabhātikā, Ṛtambharā, and Satyambharā. The names of the mountains are Maṇikūta, Vajrakūta, Indrasena, Jyotiṣmāna, Suparṇa, Hiraṇyasthīva, and Meghamāla.

[Ch 12 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The seeing and drinking the waters of these rivers take away all sins and all darkness due to ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, Pataṅga. Ürdhvāyana, and Satyāṅga, corresponding to the four casts Brāhmaṇa, etc. The inhabitants of this Plakṣa Dvīpa live for one thousand years; and all are of variegated wonderful appearances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The seeing and drinking the waters of these rivers take away all sins and all darkness due to ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, Patanga, Ūrdḥāyana, and Satyāṅga, corresponding to the four castes Brāhmaṇa, etc. The inhabitants of this Plakṣa Dvīpa live for one thousand years and all are of variegated wonderful appearances.

[Ch 12 Verse 13-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They follow the customs and usages dictated by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the worship is done is this: We take refuge unto that Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of the Ancient Person Viṣṇu and Who is the Ordainer of Satya (Truth), Rtā (Straight forwardness), Brahma, Amṛta (Immortality) and Mṛtyu (Death).
NEW CORR ENG ──► They follow the customs and usages dictated by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the worship is done is this :-- We take refuge unto that Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of the Ancient Person Viṣṇu and Who is the Ordainer of Satya (Truth), Ritā (Straight forwardness), Brahmā, Amrita (Immortality) and Mrityu (Death);

[Ch 12 Verse 16-17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! All the persons here live long, of vigorous senses, energetic, powerful, intelligent, enthusiasts and valorous; everyone gets extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this Plakṣa Dvipa is the Iksu Ocean. This Iksu Sagara surrounds the Plakṣa Dvipa. Next comes Sālmala Dvipa. It is twice as large as Plakṣa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! All the persons here live long, of vigorous senses, energetic, powerful, intelligent, enthusiasts, and valorous; everyone gets extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this Plakṣa Dvīpa is the Ikṣu Ocean. This Ikṣu Sāgara surrounds the Plakṣa Dvīpa. Next comes Śalmala Dvīpa. It is twice as large as Plakṣa.

[Ch 12 Verse 18-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Dvipa is surrounded by Surāsāgara (the ocean of wine). There is a tree named Sālmali in this island, which is as large as the Plakṣa tree. The high-souled Garuda resides on that tree. Yajñabāhu is the Ruler of this place.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Dvīpa is surrounded by Surāsāgara (the ocean of wine). There is a tree named Śalmalī in this island, which is as large as the Plakṣa tree. The high-souled Garuḍa resides on that tree, Yajñavāhu is the Ruler of this place.

[Ch 12 Verse 20-21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was born of Priyavrata; he divided his Varsapinto the seven parts and distributed each of them to his seven sons respectively. Now hear the names of these Varsas: Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramana, Deva Varsa, Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana, and Vijñāta. Seven mountains and seven rivers exist there respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was born of Priyavrata; he divided his Varṣa into the seven parts and distributed each of them to his seven sons respectively. Now hear the names of these Varṣas :-- Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramaṇa, Deva Varṣa, Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana, and Vijñāta. Seven mountains and seven rivers exist there respectively.

[Ch 12 Verse 22-23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The names of the mountains are: Sarasa, Śataśṛṅga, Vāma Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda, Puṣpavarsa, and Sahasra-Śruti. Now hear the names of the rivers.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The names of the mountains are :-- Sarasa, Śataśriṅga, Vāma Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda, Puṣpavarṣa, and Sahasra-Śruti. Now hear the names

[Ch 12 Verse 24-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Anumati, Sinīvāli, Sarasvati, Kūhu, Rajanī, Nandā, and Rākā; these are the seven rivers. The people are divided into the four castes: Śrutadhara, Viryadhara, Vasundhara, Iśundhara. These correspond to the Brāhmanas, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Anumati, Sinībālī, Sarasvatī, Kūhu, Rajanī, Nandā, and Rākā; these are the seven rivers. The people are divided into the four castes :-- Śrutadhara, Vīryadhara, Vasundhara, Iṣundhara. These correspond to the Brāhmaṇas, etc.

[Ch 12 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They worship the Bhagavān Moon, the Controller of all and the Creator of all the Vedas. They offer food duly in the black and white fortnight to their Pitrs The mantra for their worship is: 'Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.' O Nārada! Next to Surāsāgara is Kuśadvīpa, surrounded by Ghrtaṣāgara (the ocean of clarified butter).
NEW CORR ENG ──► They worship the Bhagavān Moon, the Controller of all and the Creator of all the Vedas. They offer food duly in the black and white fortnight to their Pitris. The mantra for their worship is :-- “Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.” O Nārada! Next to Surāsāgara is Kuśadvīpa, surrounded by Ghritasāgara (the ocean of clarified butter).

[Ch 12 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades of Kuśa grass, of a very resplendent colour. The name of the Dvīpa is from this Kuśastamba. This bundle of Kuśa, illumines all the quarters with their gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvīpa is Hiranyaretā, the son of Priyavrata.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades of Kuśa grass, of a very resplendent colour. The name of the Dvīpa is from this Kuśastamba. This bundle of Kuśa, illumines all the quarters with their gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvīpa is Hiraṇyaretā, the son of Priyavrata.

[Ch 12 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He divided the Dvipa into seven parts and distributed each of them to each of his seven sons respectively. The name of the seven sons are: Vasu, Vasudāna, Drgharuci, Nābhigupta, Sutyavrata Vivikta, and Bhāmadevaka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He divided the Dvīpa into seven parts and distributed each of them to each of his seven sons respectively. The names of the seven sons are :-- Vasu, Vasudāna, Dhriḍharuci, Nābhigupta, Stutyavrata, Vivikta, and Bhāmadevaka.

[Ch 12 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There are seven mountains forming the seven boundaries and so are the seven rivers. Hear the names of these. The names of the mountains are: Cakra, Catuhśrṅga, Kapila, Cirtre Devānika, Kūta, Ürdhvaromā and Dravina. The names of the rivers are:
NEW CORR ENG ──► There are seven mountains forming the seven boundaries and so are the seven rivers. Hear the names of these. The names of the mountains are :-- Cakra, Catuhśriṅga, Kapila, Chitre Devānīka, Kūta, Ūrdharomā and Draviṇa. The

[Ch 12 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rasakulyā, Madhukulyā, Mitravindā Śrutavindā, Devagarbhā, Ghrṭācyut, and Mantramālikā. The inhabitants of the Kuśadvīpa drink the waters of these rivers. There are the four castes here Kuśala, Kovida. Abhiyukta and Kulaka corresponding to the Brāhmaṇas, etc.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- Rasakulyā, Madhukulyā, Mitravindā, Śrutavindā, Devagarbhā, Ghritācyut, and Mantramalikā. The inhabitants of the Kuśadvīpa drink the waters of these rivers. There are the four castes here Kuśala, Kovida, Abhiyukta, and Kulaka corresponding to the Brāhmaṇas, etc.

[Ch 12 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They are all powerful like Indra and the other chief Devas; and all of them are omniscient. They worship the Fire God and perform various good works in honour of Him. Their mantra is this: 'O Fire! Thou carriest the oblations direct to Para Brahma. In the sacrifices of the Devas, Thou worshippest that Personal God and offerest to Him whatever are given in oblations, mentioning the respective limbs of His Body. Thus the inhabitants of that Dvipa worship the Fire God. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of Plakşa, Sâlmala, and Kuša Dvipas in the Mahāpurānam, Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They are all powerful like Indra and the other chief Devas; and all of them are omniscient. They worship the Fire God and perform various good works in honour of Him. Their mantra is this :-- O Fire! Thou carriest the oblations direct to Para Brahmā. In the sacrifices of the Devas, Thou worshippest that Personal God and offerest to Him whatever are given in oblations, mentioning the respective limbs of His Body. Thus the inhabitants of that Dvīpa worship the Fire God. Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of Plakṣa, Śālmala, and Kuśa Dvīpas in the Mahāpurānam, Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
