CHAPTER XXIII

On the Prowess of Kauśiki

व्यास उवाच

एवं सुतृता तदा देखी दैवहैः: शुज्ञात्रिकेः ।

स्वर्गरीतरवं रूपं प्रापुर्युं चकार है ॥ १ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, the Devi created from Her body another supremely beautiful form.

पार्वेत्यस्तु शरीराई नि:सृता चाधिका तदा ।

कौशिकीति समतेषु ततो कोकेषु पढ़ते ॥ 2 ॥

This created form, the Ambikā Devi, became

known in all the worlds as Kauśiki, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devi Pārvatī.

निद्यातां तु तस्यां सा पार्वीनी तनुव्यतयात् ।

कृष्णकाप्रध सुस्तात कालिका सा प्रकर्षितिं ॥ ३ ॥

मर्षीवाणं महाधोरा दैत्यानां भयवर्धिनी ।

कालराजीति सा प्रोक्ता सर्वकामफलप्रदा ॥ 4 ॥

When Kauśiki was created out of the body of Pārvatī, the Pārvatī's body became transformed and turned out into a black colour and became

Book V Chapter XXIII

known as Kālīkā. Her terrible black appearance, when beheld, increases the terror even of the Daityas.

अधिकाया: परे हर्षे विरराज मनोहरम् ।

सर्वभूषणसैभुक्ते लावणवगुणसंगुवन् ॥ 5 ॥

O King! This Devi is now become known in this world as Kālarātri, the night of destruction, at the end of the world, identified with Durgā, the Fulfiller of all the desires.

ततोप्रविका तदा देवान्तिवल्याच हु सस्मिता ।

निहन्तु निर्भया युयं हनियाथि सिपूनि ॥ 6 ॥

The Ambikā Devi, then, began to look splendid, decked with various ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look very lovely. The Devi Ambikā then smiled a little and said, “Better be fearless; I will slay just now your enemies.

कार्य वः सर्वेथा कार्य सिद्धिर्याम्यर्थे रो ।

निरुभादी-विध्यामि युयाकं सुखहतेते ॥ 7 ॥

It is My incumbent duty to carry out your purposes; I will therefore slay in battle Nisumbha and others for the sake of your happiness."

इत्युक्त्वा सा तदा देवो सिंहारूका मदोल्कटा ।

कालिकां पार्थत: कृत्वा जगाम नगरे रिपोः ॥ 8 ॥

Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavatī, elated with pride, mounted on lion and, taking Kālākā with Her, entered into the city of Sumbha, the enemy of the gods.

सा गतोपयने तस्थाविक्यका कालिकावित्य।

जगावय कलं तत्र जगन्मोहनमोहनम् ॥ 9 ॥

Ambikā went to a garden adjoining the city accompanied Kālākā, and began to sing in such a sweet melodious tune that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates the whole world.

भुत्वा तन्यभूरं गानो महोर्षीयुः खगा मृगाः ।

मूदं च परमामापुरमरा गाने स्थिताः ॥ १० ॥

What more can be said than the fact that, hearing that sweet melodious song, the birds and beasts became enchanted; the Devas then began to feel much pleasure from the sky.

तस्मिवसरे तत्र दानवो शूभ्मसेवकी ।

चण्डपुण्डाधिषी धौते रमागणी यदच्छया ॥ 1 1 ॥

आगती ददुपगते तु तौ तदा दिव्यस्विणीम् ।

अधिकां गानसेवुक्तां कालिकां पुतः चित्ताम् ॥ 12 ॥

In the meanwhile Canda, Munga the two dreadful Asuras, and attendants of Śumbha, came out accidentally there on their sportive excursions and saw the beautiful Ambikā Deviś singing and Kālika Deviś sitting before Her.

दृष्टा तां दिव्यल्पां च दानवी दिव्यमात्रिति ।

जमतुस्तरासा पार्शं शुपम्यय नृपस्तम ॥ 13 ॥

O best of Kings! No sooner Gandā, Munḍa saw the extraordinary beauty of the Goddess Bhagavati, than they went at once to Śumbha.

तौ गत्वा तं समासीनं दैत्यानामधिर्य गृहे ।

कंचतुर्मंडुरां वाणीं प्रणाय शिरसा नृपम् ॥ १४ ॥

राजन्हिमालयात्कामं कामिनी काममोहित्री ।

सम्याता सिंहमारूढा सर्वतैक्षणपर्वेतुा ॥ १ ५ ॥

On approaching towards the lord of the Daityas sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus in a sweet voice:—“O King! Here has come from the Himalayas a woman accidentally, mounted on a lion; Her limbs are, shining with all good signs so much so that even the God of love would be enchanted by Her sight.

नैदुपी देवलोकेंर्जित न नायवंदुपे तथा ।

न दृष्टा न सुता कवापि पुविष्यां प्रपदोत्तमा ॥ 16 ॥

Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandharva Lokas or in this earth can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor heard about such a lady before.

गानं च तादृषी राजकानेति जनराजूनम् ।

भूगपित्रहान्त तत्थर्षं मनुप्रत्यवगोहिताः ॥ 17 ॥

O King! That lady is singing so beautifully and pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing motionless by Her side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice.

ज्ञायतों कस्य पुत्रीयं क्रियांमिह चागत ।

गृह्धतां राजशादूल तव योग्यास्ति कामिनि ॥ 18 ॥

O King! That Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter is this lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her.

ज्ञाला नय गृहे भार्यों कुक कल्याणलोचनाम् ।

निश्रिंत नानि संसोने नारी लेवेंबिधा कित ॥ 19 ॥

Know this as certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in this world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her.

देवानां सर्वेल्पानि गृहीतानि त्वया यून ।

कमाओमां वरातोहां प्रगृहासि नृपोत्तम ॥ 20 ॥

O Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the Devas; why not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady?

इन्स्ट्रीरातः श्रीमान्यारिजाततक्रस्तथा ।

गृहीतेशः सचमुखास्वया नृप बलातिकल ॥ 21 ॥

O King! You have taken by force the exquisitely beautiful Airāvata elephant of Indra, the Parijāta Tree, the seven faced horse Ucaisāravā, and many other jewels.

विभानं वैधसं दिव्यं माललध्वजसंयुतम् ।

त्वासा उरं तलमृतं तढ़नेन युच चाढ़तम् ॥ 22 ॥

You have acquired by your might the Prince of Jewels, the celestial car of the Creator Brahmā, ensigned by the emblematic Swan.

कुबेरस्य निधि: पचास्वया राजनस्माहतः ।

छंज जलपते: शुभं गृहीति तत्त्वया बलात् ॥ 23 ॥

You have dispossessed Kubera of his treasure of the value of a Padma (one thousand billion) and Varuna, the God of oceans, of his white umbrella.

पाश्राशि निरुभ्यमेन भात्रा तव नृपोतम ।

गृहीतोस्ति हटाकामां वर्णायण जितवच च ॥ 24 ॥

O King! When Varuna was defeated, your brother Niśumbha took perforce his Pāśa weapon.

अलानपत्रज्ञां तृभ्ये मालां जलनिधिद्वैति ।

भयातव महाराज रन्तानि विवधातिन च ॥ 25 ॥

O King! The Great Ocean gave you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured you by presenting a garland of lotuses which never fade away.

मृत्यो: शक्तिर्यमस्यायि एण्डः परमदात्णः ।

त्वया जिल्वा हूतः कामं जिकमव्युदयोंते नृप ॥ 26 ॥

What more can be said than the fact that you have conquered the Death and took away His force and that you have easily conquered Yama, the God of Death and have taken from Him His horrible staff.

कामधेत्रगृहीतास इतंते सागतेढ़वा ।

मेनकाशा बेरो गरसंतल शिक्छित चाधसः ॥ 27 ॥

O King! You have brought that Heavenly cow which came out when then ocean churned; that cow is still with you; what more to say than that Menakā and other Apsarās are under your control. एवं सर्वांशि रन्तानि तवास3न्तानि बतावपि ।

कम्यान गृहाते कान्तारनमेधा वराङून ॥ 28 ॥

Thus you have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you not taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels, amongst women.

सर्वाणि ते गृहस्याति रन्तानि विश्वादाय ।

अनरया सभविध्यन्ति रत्नभूताति भूपते ॥ 29 ॥

O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their real purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with this queen of jewels—this Lady.

विषु लोकेषु दैवेन्ये नेपूर्णी वर्तेते प्रिया ।

तस्मातामानयाण्ये लं कुक भार्यों मनोहारणे ॥ 30 ॥

O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and accept Her as your wife.

व्यास उवाच

इति श्रुता त्योबांक्यं मयुं मयुग्राकरण ।

प्रसत्रवदनः ग्राह सुत्रीयं सरिष्ये सरिष्ये ॥ ३ १ ॥

गच्छ सुग्रीव दृतत्वं कुक कार्य विश्वक्षण ।

वक्तव्यं च तथा तन ययावंधेति कुशोदरी ॥ ३ २ ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of Caṇḍa and Munḍa, Śumbha spoke gladly to Sugrīva who was close by: “Go, Sugrīva, do my messenger’s work; you are well skilled in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist may come over to me.

Book V Chapter XXIII

उपायौ द्वी प्रयोक्त्यौ कान्तासु सुविचक्षणैः ।

सामदाने इति प्रपुः श्रुत्रसस्कोविदः ॥ ३३ ॥

Those who are well versed in the science of amorous love declare that only two methods are to be adopted by the clever persons towards the female sex: (1) conciliation and gentle words and (2) gifts and presents.

घेरे प्रयुस्थमानेउनि रसाधासस्तु जायते ।

निऋई रसभूँः: स्यातस्मातौ दृषिती बुढ़ेः ॥ 34 ॥

For if the policy of division or sowing dissensions be applied then hypocrisy is shown and that means the improper manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if chastisement be applied then the love sentiment becomes interrupted.

सामदानमुखैवार्वसैः: रतक्षौर्भैर्मधुतेलथा ।

का न याति वशे दूत कामिनी कामपीढिता ॥ 35 ॥

Therefore, the wise have condemned these as corrupt means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who does not come round excited with passion when good and sweet words are spoken to her in accordance with the Sāma and Dāna methods?

व्यास उवाच

सुगीवस्तु वचः श्रुत्वा रुष्णोर्फं कष्टिपयं पटु ।

जगाम तसा तव यमासे जगद्विक्का ॥ ३६ ॥

सोप्रथम्युपुर्षी कानां तिंहस्योपर सैंस्थिता ।

प्रणाय मधुरं वाक्यमुवाच जगद्विक्काम् ॥ 37 ॥

Vyāsa said: Sugriva, hearing the nice skilled words of Śumbha went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the Universe. He saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and spoke gently and sweetly as follows:

दूत उवाच

चरेकि चिद्गशारितः शुभ्मः सर्वानुसुन्दरः ।

त्रैतोक्याधिपतेः शूरः सर्वेचिज्ञजते सूचः ॥ 38 ॥

The messenger said: “O Beautiful One! Śumbha, the enemy of the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the ruler of the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all.

तेनताई प्रेषितः कामं त्वत्सकार्ण महात्मना ।

त्वदुपश्वजपासक्तिश्चेनातिविद्युक्ता ॥ 39 ॥

Hearing your beauty and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much attached to you and has become so very passionate that he has sent me to you to express his views.

वचनं तस्य तत्विक्रं श्युणु प्रेमपुर:सर्मः ।
प्राणपत्य यथा प्राह दैत्यानामधिपत्यत्विय ॥ 40 ॥ 

देवा मया वित्तः सर्वे तैलोक्याधिपतित्वसहम् ।

यजभागगाहं काने गृह्मागीह स्थितः सदा ॥ 41 ॥

O One of delicate limbs! Please hear what that Lord of the Daityas has spoken Thee, after duly saluting to Thee, words full of love and affection towards Thee: O Beloved! I have defeated all the Devas and have thus become the Lord of the three worlds; specially I partake of all the offerings made in sacrificial acts and ceremonies, without moving away from my house.

हतसारा कृता नूनं दीर्भेय स्तवर्जिता ।

यासि स्तानि देवानां तानि चाह्तवानकम् ॥ 42 ॥

I have taken away all the gems, jewels and wealth that belonged to the Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods has become now worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried away.

भोक्ताङ्गं सर्वत्नानां विषु लोकेषु याभिनि ।

वशानुगाः सुरा: सर्वे मम देत्याक्षं मानवाः ॥ 43 ॥

O Fair One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the Trilokas; so much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are passing away their times, subservient to Me.

त्वदुगुणै: कर्णमागव प्रविष्य हृदयांतम् ।

त्वद्धीनः कृतः कामे किंकरींस्म क्रोम किम् ॥ 44 ॥

त्वमाजायय रभोते तक्ररोमि वशानुगः ।

दासोड़हं तव चार्वीग रक्ष मां कामबाणत: ॥ 45 ॥

But no sooner Thy qualifications reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and hast made me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am now Thy servant; so Thou ought'st to save me

from the darts of passions. O One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your captive.

भज मो तंच मरालाशि तवाधीने स्मारुकलम् ।

शैलोक्यसामिनी भूत्वा भूंकुव भोगानुतनाम् ॥ 4 6 ॥

Specially I am extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; therefore dost Thou serve me when Thou wilt be made the Lord of the three worlds and thus enjoy the incomparably excellent things.

तव चात्राकर: कान्ते भवामि मरणाविधि ।

अवधोर्धासि वरारोहे सदैवातुर्मानुषैः ॥ 47 ॥

सदा सीयायसंयुक्ता भविष्यसि वरानने ।

O Beloved! I will remain ever Thy obedient servant up to the last moment of death. O Excellent One! I cannot ever be killed by the Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair faced One! Thou wilt be always prosperous and fortunate.

घन ते रमते चित्त तज क्रीडव्य सुन्दरि ॥ 48 ॥

इति तस्य वर्धिश्रते विमुघय मदमन्त्ये ।

वत्क्यं यद्वदेवीपणा तदूब्किं हमूयं चक्न : ॥ 49 ॥

गृष्भाय चंचलापाक्षि तदुब्बीभ्यमारु वै ।

Thou wilt be able to sport anywhere Thou likest. O Devi! Please ponder over words of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out Thy views gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I will go immediately to Śumbha and inform him about Thy mind.

व्यास उवाच

तदुद्वावचनं शुत्वा मित्तं कृत्वा सुप्रेणलम् ॥ 50 ॥

तं प्रह मभुतं वाचं देवी देवायंसाधिका ।

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devī, ready to serve the cause of the Gods, heard the messenger's gentle words and replied smiling and sweetly.

शीटेख्याच

जानाम्बई निषुर्णभं च गुर्णभं चातिवलं नृपम् ॥ 51 ॥

जेतारं सर्वदैवानां हेतांरं चैव विविधाम।

Śrī Devi spoke: I know fully well Śumbha and Niśumbha; the King Śumbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, and the destroyer of enemies.

राशिं सर्वगुणानां च भोक्तारं सर्वसंयदाम् ॥ 52 ॥

दातारं चातिरुगरं च सुन्दं मन्याकृतिन् ।

He is the repository of all good qualities, the enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is beautiful, in fact a second Cupid.

ब्रात्रिंशलक्षणीयुक्तमवध्ये सुरामानुषे: ॥ 53 ॥

ज्ञाना समागतान्यमय उद्धकामा महामुगम् ।

He is adorned with thirty-two auspicious signs; particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the Devas or human beings.

रत्नं कतनकायाति स्वर्णोपाधिकवुद्धे ॥ 54 ॥

तजाई स्वपति उहुं दूरादेवागतास्थि से ।

O Messenger! Knowing this I have come here to have a look of that great warrior Sumbha. The jewel comes in contact with gold to increase its lustre; so I have come here from afar to see my husband.

दृष्टा मया सुरा: सर्वे मानवा भृति मनादः ॥ 55 ॥

गन्धर्वां राक्षसाश्रान्ये ये चातिभिर्यदर्शनाः ।

सर्वे रुंभभयाद्धोता वेपमाना विचेतसः ॥ 56 ॥

श्रूला शुभगुणानत्र प्रणातस्यवद विद्वस्या ।

On seeing all the Devas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas and the eminent beautiful persons on the earth I have come to know that they are all terror stricken and almost unconscious and shudder at the name of Śumbha. So, on hearing about his abilities, I have now come here to see him.

गच्छ दूत महाभाग कृष्टि शुभ्यं महावलम् ॥ 57 ॥

निर्जीने शल्याग्या वाचा वचनं चवनान्माम ।

त्वां सात्वा बलितां श्रेष्ठ सुवर्णाणं च सुवर्ण ॥ 58 ॥

दातारं गृणेन गृहं सर्वविद्याशिरापदम् ।

जेतारं सर्वदेवानां दक्षे चोरं कुलोतनम् ॥ 59 ॥

भोक्तां सर्वलतानां स्वाधीनं स्वखलोजतम् ।

पतिकामान्यस्मदं सत्यं तव योग्य नाराधि ॥ 60 ॥

O Messenger! O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero Sumbha and speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine: "That you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the beautiful, skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified, charitable, clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and conqueror

Book V Chapter XXIV

of the Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you are so much exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels.

स्वेच्छया नगरे तेउत्र समायाता महामते ।

मागसित कारणं किंचिविहावोर हास्पोसेन्म ॥ ६ १ ॥

Therefore, O King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my own accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband.

बालभपावदृतं किंडिकृतृतं राजन्मय पुरा ।

क्रीडांत्वा च व्यस्यथापि: सहैकाते वदुच्छया ॥ 62 ॥

स्वदेहबलदर्पेण सखीनीं पुरतो रहः ।

मत्समानक्षल: गुरो रणे मां जेच्यति सुकुद्य ॥ 63 ॥

तं विराधार्यहं कर्मां जात्वा तस्य बताबलम् ।

O High! souled One I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! There is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days while I was playing with My comrades, I promised before them privately partly out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily strength that I will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me and who will defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and weaknesses.

जहसुवंचन शुला सख्यो विमितमानसा: ॥ 64 ॥

किमेता कृतं कृरं त्रामदूतमागुं वै ।

My comrades laughed at my words and spoke with wonder “Why has this girl made such an extraordinarily difficult promise?”

तस्माचमपि राजेन्द्र जाला मे हीदुर्ग कलम् ॥ 65 ॥

बिला मां खवलेनावा वार्छितं कुरु घानतः ।

त्वं वा ततानुजो घाता समेल्य स्मरांगणे ।

बिला मां समेरणात्र विवाहं कुक सु-दर ॥ 66 ॥

इति शीमदैवीभागवतं महापुराणे घबमकन्भे

यजीवीगोर्यायाः ॥ 67 ॥

Therefore, O Monarch! Better marry Me and fulfil My desires after knowing My strength and defeating Me in a battle. O Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or your younger Niśumbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating Me in the battle field.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess of Kauśiki in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book V Chapter XXIV

