[Ch 23 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, the Devi created from Her body another supremely beautiful form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, the Devī created from Her body another supremely beautiful form.

[Ch 23 Verse 2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This created form, the Ambikā Devi, became known in all the worlds as Kauśiki, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devi Pārvatī.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This created form, the Ambikā Devī, became known in all the worlds as Kauśikī, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devī Parvatī.

[Ch 23 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Kauśiki was created out of the body of Pārvatī, the Pārvatī's body became transformed and turned out into a black colour and became known as Kālīkā. Her terrible black appearance, when beheld, increases the terror even of the Daityas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Kauśikī was created out of the body of Parvatī, the Parvatī’s body became transformed and turned out into a black colour and became known as KāIikā. Her terrible black appearance, when beheld, increases the terror even of the Daityas.

[Ch 23 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This Devi is now become known in this world as Kālarātri, the night of destruction, at the end of the world, identified with Durgā, the Fulfiller of all the desires.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This Devī is now become known in this world as Kālarātri, the night of destruction, at the end of the world, identified with Durgā, the Fulfiller of all the desires.

[Ch 23 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Ambikā Devi, then, began to look splendid, decked with various ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look very lovely. The Devi Ambikā then smiled a little and said, “Better be fearless; I will slay just now your enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Ambikā Devī, then, began to look splendid, decked with various ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look very lovely. The Devī Ambikā then smiled a little and said, “Better be fearless; I will slay just now your enemies.

[Ch 23 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is My incumbent duty to carry out your purposes; I will therefore slay in battle Nisumbha and others for the sake of your happiness."
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is My iñcumbent duty to carry out your purposes; I will therefore slay in battle Niśumbha and others for the sake of your happiness.”

[Ch 23 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavatī, elated with pride, mounted on lion and, taking Kālākā with Her, entered into the city of Sumbha, the enemy of the gods.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, the Devī Bhagavatī, elated with pride, mounted on lion and, taking Kālikā with Her, entered into the city of Śumbha, the enemy of the gods.

[Ch 23 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Ambikā went to a garden adjoining the city accompanied Kālākā, and began to sing in such a sweet melodious tune that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates the whole world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Ambikā went to a garden adjoining the city accompanied by Kālikā, and began to sing in such a sweet melodious tune that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates the whole world.

[Ch 23 Verse 10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that, hearing that sweet melodious song, the birds and beasts became enchanted; the Devas then began to feel much pleasure from the sky.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that, hearing that sweet melodious song, the birds and beasts became enchanted; the Devas then began to feel much pleasure from the Sky.

[Ch 23 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► In the meanwhile Canda, Munga the two dreadful Asuras, and attendants of Śumbha, came out accidentally there on their sportive excursions and saw the beautiful Ambikā Deviś singing and Kālika Deviś sitting before Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► In the meanwhile Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa the two dreadful Asuras, and attendants of Śumbha, came out accidentally there on their sportive excursions and saw the beautiful Ambikā Devī singing and Kālikā Devī sitting before Her.

[Ch 23 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O best of Kings! No sooner Gandā, Munḍa saw the extraordinary beauty of the Goddess Bhagavati, than they went at once to Śumbha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O best of Kings! No sooner Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa saw the extraordinary beauty of the Goddess Bhagavatī, than they went at once to Śumbha.

[Ch 23 Verse 14-15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On approaching towards the lord of the Daityas sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus in a sweet voice:—“O King! Here has come from the Himalayas a woman accidentally, mounted on a lion; Her limbs are, shining with all good signs so much so that even the God of love would be enchanted by Her sight.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On approaching towards the lord of the Daityas sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus in a sweet voice :-- "O King! Here has come from the Himālayās a woman accidentally, mounted on a lion; Her limbs are shining with all good signs so much so that even the God of love would be enchanted by Her sight.

[Ch 23 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandharva Lokas or in this earth can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor heard about such a lady before.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandarbha Lokas or in this earth can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor heard about such a lady before.

[Ch 23 Verse 17]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That lady is singing so beautifully and pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing motionless by Her side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! That lady is singing so beautifully and pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing motionless by Her side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice.

[Ch 23 Verse 18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! That Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter is this lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! That Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter is this lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her.

[Ch 23 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Know this as certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in this world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Know this as certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in this world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her.

[Ch 23 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the Devas; why not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady?
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the Devas; why not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady?

[Ch 23 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You have taken by force the exquisitely beautiful Airāvata elephant of Indra, the Parijāta Tree, the seven faced horse Ucaisāravā, and many other jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! You have taken by force the exquisitely beautiful Airāvata elephant of Indra, the Pārijāta Tree, the seven faced horse Uccaiśravā, and many other jewels.

[Ch 23 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have acquired by your might the Prince of Jewels, the celestial car of the Creator Brahmā, ensigned by the emblematic Swan.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have acquired by your might the Prince of Jewels, the celestial car of the Creator Brahmā, ensigned by the emblematic Swan.

[Ch 23 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have dispossessed Kubera of his treasure of the value of a Padma (one thousand billion) and Varuna, the God of oceans, of his white umbrella.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have dispossessed Kuvera of his treasure of the value of a Padma (one thousand billion) and Varuṇa, the God of oceans, of his white umbrella.

[Ch 23 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! When Varuna was defeated, your brother Niśumbha took perforce his Pāśa weapon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! When Varuṇa was defeated, your brother Niśumbha took perforce his Pāśa weapon.

[Ch 23 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The Great Ocean gave you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured you by presenting a garland of lotuses which never fade away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! The Great Ocean gave you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured you by presenting a garland of lotuses which never fade away.

[Ch 23 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that you have conquered the Death and took away His force and that you have easily conquered Yama, the God of Death and have taken from Him His horrible staff.
NEW CORR ENG ──► What more can be said than the fact that you have conquered the Death and took away His force and that you have easily conquered Yama, the God of Death and have taken from Him His horrible staff.

[Ch 23 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus you have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you not taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels, amongst women.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus you have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you not taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels, amongst women.

[Ch 23 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their real purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with this queen of jewels—this Lady.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their real purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with this queen of jewels, this Lady.

[Ch 23 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and accept Her as your wife.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and accept Her as your wife.

[Ch 23 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of Caṇḍa and Munḍa, Śumbha spoke gladly to Sugrīva who was close by: “Go, Sugrīva, do my messenger’s work; you are well skilled in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist may come over to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, Śumbha spoke gladly to Sugrīva who was close by :-- “Go, Sugrīva, do my messenger’s work; you are well skilled in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist may come over to me.

[Ch 23 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are well versed in the science of amorous love declare that only two methods are to be adopted by the clever persons towards the female sex: (1) conciliation and gentle words and (2) gifts and presents.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are well versed in the science of amorous love declare that only two methods are to be adopted by the clever persons towards the female sex :-- (1) conciliation and gentle words and (2) gifts and presents.

[Ch 23 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► For if the policy of division or sowing dissensions be applied then hypocrisy is shown and that means the improper manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if chastisement be applied then the love sentiment becomes interrupted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► For if the policy of division or sowing dissensions be applied, then hypocrisy is shewn and that means the improper manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if chastisement be applied then the love sentiment becomes interrupted.

[Ch 23 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, the wise have condemned these as corrupt means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who does not come round excited with passion when good and sweet words are spoken to her in accordance with the Sāma and Dāna methods?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, the wise have condemned these as corrupt means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who does not come round excited with passion when good and sweet words are spoken to her in accordance with the Śama and Dāna methods?”

[Ch 23 Verse 36-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: Sugriva, hearing the nice skilled words of Śumbha went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the Universe. He saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and spoke gently and sweetly as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- Sugrīva, hearing the nice skilled words of Śumbha went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the Universe. He saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and spoke gently and sweetly as follows :--

[Ch 23 Verse 38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The messenger said: “O Beautiful One! Śumbha, the enemy of the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the ruler of the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The messenger said :-- “O Beautiful One! Śumbha, the enemy of the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the ruler of the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all.

[Ch 23 Verse 39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing your beauty and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much attached to you and has become so very passionate that he has sent me to you to express his views.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing your beauty and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much attached to you and has become so very passionate that he has sent me to you to express his views.

[Ch 23 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O One of delicate limbs! Please hear what that Lord of the Daityas has spoken Thee, after duly saluting to Thee, words full of love and affection towards Thee: O Beloved! I have defeated all the Devas and have thus become the Lord of the three worlds; specially I partake of all the offerings made in sacrificial acts and ceremonies, without moving away from my house.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O One of delicate limbs! Please hear what that Lord of the Daityas has spoken to Thee, after duly saluting Thee, words full of love and affection towards Thee :-- O Beloved! I have defeated all the Devas and have thus become the Lord of the three worlds; specially I partake of all the offerings made in sacrificial acts and ceremonies, without moving away from my house.

[Ch 23 Verse 42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I have taken away all the gems, jewels and wealth that belonged to the Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods has become now worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried away.
NEW CORR ENG ──► I have taken away all the gems, jewels and wealth that belonged to the Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods has become now worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried sway.

[Ch 23 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Fair One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the Trilokas; so much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are passing away their times, subservient to Me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Fair One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the Trilokas; so much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are passing away their times, subservient to Me.

[Ch 23 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► But no sooner Thy qualifications reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and hast made me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am now Thy servant; so Thou ought'st to save me from the darts of passions. O One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your captive.
NEW CORR ENG ──► But no sooner Thy qualifications reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and has made me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am now Thy servant; so Thou oughtest to save me from the darts of passion. O One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your captive.

[Ch 23 Verse 46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Specially I am extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; therefore dost Thou serve me when Thou wilt be made the Lord of the three worlds and thus enjoy the incomparably excellent things.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Specially I am extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; therefore dost Thou serve me when Thou wilt be made the Lord of the three worlds and thus enjoy the incomparably excellent things.

[Ch 23 Verse 47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Beloved! I will remain ever Thy obedient servant up to the last moment of death. O Excellent One! I cannot ever be killed by the Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair faced One! Thou wilt be always prosperous and fortunate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Beloved! I will remain ever Thy obedient servant up to the last moment of death. O Excellent One! I cannot ever be killed by the Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair faced One! Thou wilt be always prosperous and fortunate.

[Ch 23 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou wilt be able to sport anywhere Thou likest. O Devi! Please ponder over words of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out Thy views gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I will go immediately to Śumbha and inform him about Thy mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou wilt be able to sport anywhere Thou likest. O Devī! Please ponder over the above words of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out Thy views gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I will go immediately to Śumbha and inform him about Thy mind.”

[Ch 23 Verse 50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! The Devī, ready to serve the cause of the Gods, heard the messenger's gentle words and replied smiling and sweetly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! The Devī, ready to serve the cause of the Gods, heard the messenger’s gentle words and replied smiling and sweetly.

[Ch 23 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Devi spoke: I know fully well Śumbha and Niśumbha; the King Śumbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, and the destroyer of enemies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Devī spoke :-- I know fully well Śumbha and Niśumbha; the King Śumbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, and the destroyer of enemies.

[Ch 23 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is the repository of all good qualities, the enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is beautiful, in fact a second Cupid.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is the repository of all good qualities, the enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is beautiful, in fact a second Cupid.

[Ch 23 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He is adorned with thirty-two auspicious signs; particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the Devas or human beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He is adorned with thirty-two auspicious signs; particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the Devas or human beings.

[Ch 23 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Messenger! Knowing this I have come here to have a look of that great warrior Sumbha. The jewel comes in contact with gold to increase its lustre; so I have come here from afar to see my husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Messenger! Knowing this I have come here to have a look of that great warrior Śumbha. The jewel comes in contact with gold to increase its lustre; so I have come here from afar to see my husband.

[Ch 23 Verse 55-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On seeing all the Devas, Gandharvas, Rāksasas and the eminent beautiful persons on the earth I have come to know that they are all terror stricken and almost unconscious and shudder at the name of Śumbha. So, on hearing about his abilities, I have now come here to see him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On seeing all the Devas, Gandharbhas, Rākṣasas and the eminent beautiful persons on the earth I have come to know that they are all terror stricken and almost unconscious and shudder at the name of Śumbha. So, on hearing about his abilities, I have now come here to see him.

[Ch 23 Verse 57-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Messenger! O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero Sumbha and speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine: "That you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the beautiful, skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified, charitable, clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and conqueror of the Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you are so much exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Messenger! O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero Śumbha and speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine :-- “That you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the beautifuls, skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified, charitable, clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and conqueror of the Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you are so much exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels.

[Ch 23 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my own accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my own accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband.

[Ch 23 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O High! souled One I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! There is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days while I was playing with My comrades, I promised before them privately partly out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily strength that I will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me and who will defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and weaknesses.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O High-souled One! I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! There is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days while I was playing with My comrades, I promised before them privately partly out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily strength that I will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me and who will defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and weaknesses.

[Ch 23 Verse 64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► My comrades laughed at my words and spoke with wonder “Why has this girl made such an extraordinarily difficult promise?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► My comrades laughed at my words and spoke with wonder, ‘Why has this girl made such an extraordinarily difficult promise?

[Ch 23 Verse 65-67]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O Monarch! Better marry Me and fulfil My desires after knowing My strength and defeating Me in a battle. O Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or your younger Niśumbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating Me in the battle field. Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess of Kauśiki in Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, the Mahāpurānam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O Monarch! Better marry Me and fulfil My desires after knowing My strength and defeating Me in a battle. O Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or your younger Niśumbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating Me in the battlefield.” Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess of Kauśikī in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, the Mahāpurāṇam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
