[Ch 13 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Lord for of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did Gaṅgā go after 5000 (five thousand) year of the Kali Yuga?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- O Lord of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did Gaṅgā go after 5000 (five thousand) years of the Kali Yuga?

[Ch 13 Verse 2-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: The Bhāgirathi Gāngā came down to Bhārata under the course of Bhāratī; and when, the term expired, She went back, be the Will of God, to the region of Vaikuntha. Also at the end of the period of their curses, Bhārati and, Lakṣmī, too, left Bhārata and repaired to Nārāyaṇa. Gaṅgā, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvati, these three and Tulasi all these four are so very dear to Śrī Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- The Bhāgīrathī Gaṅgā came down to Bhārata under the curse of Bhāratī; and when the term expired, She went back, by the Will of God, to the region of Vaikuṇṭha. Also at the end of the period of their curses, Bhāratī and, Lakṣmī, too, left Bhārata and repaired to Nārāyaṇa. Gaṅgā, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvatī, these three and Tulasī all these four are so very dear to Śrī Hari.

[Ch 13 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārad said: How did Gaṅgā appear from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu? Why did Brahmā put Her in His Kamandalu? I have heard that Gaṅgā is the wife of Śiva; how then, came She to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Kindly describe all these jn detail to me.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- How did Gaṅgā appear from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu? Why did Brahmā put Her in His Kamaṇḍalu? I have heard that Gaṅgā is the wife of Śiva; how then, came She to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Kindly describe all these in detail to me.

[Ch 13 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of Goloka, Gāngā assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the bodies of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So she is of the nature of both of them and their parts. Gāngā is the presiding deity, of water. She is unequalled in Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and adorned with all ornaments.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of Goloka, Gaṅgā assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the bodies of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So She is of the nature of both of them and their parts. Gaṅgā is the presiding deity of water. She is unequalled in Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and adorned with all ornaments.

[Ch 13 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile was always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the Autumnal Moon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile was always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the Autumnal Moon.

[Ch 13 Verse 10-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Śuddha Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard and She was covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. Her breasts were plump and prominent; they were raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very fascinating, always casting side-long glances.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Suddha Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard and She was covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. Her breasts were plump and prominent; they were raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very fascinating, always casting sidelong glances.

[Ch 13 Verse 12-13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her braids of hair situated a little oblique and the garland of Málati flowers over it made Her look extremely handsome. The sandal-paste dot and the vermilion dot were seen on Her fore-head. On Her cheeks the leaves of musk were drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhūka flowers and they looked enchanting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her braids of hair situated a little oblique and the garland of Mālatī flowers over it made Her look extremely handsome. The saudalpaste dot and the vermillion dot were seen on Her forehead. On Her cheeks the leaves of musk were drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhūka flowers and they looked enchanting.

[Ch 13 Verse 14-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe promegranates; the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in front in a know round the waist She sat by the side of Krṣṇa, full of amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end of Her cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gage the face of the Lord and She was drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. Her lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at the expectation of a first amorous embrace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe pomegranates; the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in front in a knot round the waist. She sat by the side of Kṛṣṇa, full of amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end of Her cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gaze the face of the Lord and She was drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. Her lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at the expectation of a first amorous embrace.

[Ch 13 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord and a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the Šrimaddevībhāgavatam meanwhile Rādhikā came up there. Rādhā was attended by thirty kotis of Gopīs. She looked brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing Gaṅgā by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa, Her face and eyes became reddened with anger like a red lotus.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord and a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the meanwhile Rādhikā came up there. Rādhā was attended by thirty koṭis of Gopīs. She looked brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing Gaṅgā by the side of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Her face and eyes became reddened with anger like a red lotus.

[Ch 13 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her colour was yellow like campaka and Her gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned with various invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and not inflammable by fire. (fire-proof).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her colour was yellow like champaka and Her gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned with various invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and not inflammable by fire (fire-proof).

[Ch 13 Verse 21-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Arghya offered by Śrī Krṣṇa was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowing shrub-Bibiscus mutabilis and She was going slowly step by step. The Rṣis began to fan Her with white Cāmaras no sooner She, descending from the excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Arghya offered by Śrī Kṛṣṇa was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowering shrub, Hibiscus mutabilis, and She was going slowly step by step. The Ṛṣis began to fan Her with white Cāmaras no sooner She, descending from the excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk.

[Ch 13 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Below the pont where the parting of the hairs on the head is done, there was the dot of Sindūra on Her fore-head. If looked brilliant like a bright lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindūrabindu, the dot of musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver with anger, Her braid, with Pārijāta round it began to tremble also.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Below the point where the parting of the hairs on the head is done, there was the dot of Sindura on Her forehead. It looked brilliant like a bright lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindurabindu, the dot of musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver with anger, Her braid, with Pārijāta garland round it began to tremble also.

[Ch 13 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. She took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side Śrī Krṣṇa. Her attendants took their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing Rādhā, Śrī Krṣṇa got up at once from His seat with reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her in sweet words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. She took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Her attendants took their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa got up at once from His seat with reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her in sweet words.

[Ch 13 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Gopís, very much afraid and with their heads bent low, began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. Śrī Krṣṇa also began to praise Her with stotras. At this moment Gaṅgā Devi got up and praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and with humble words. Out of fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Gopīs, very much afraid and with their heads bent low, began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also began to praise Her with stotras. At this moment Gaṅgā Devī got up and praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and with humble words. Out of fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up.

[Ch 13 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She took refuge humbly at Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then took Gaṅgā Devi on His breast when She became calm and quiet. At this interval Suresvari Gaṅgā looked at Rādhā, seated on a throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahma Fire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She took refuge humbly at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s feet. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then, took Gaṅgā Devī on His breast when She became calm and quiet. At this interval Sureśvarī Gaṅgā looked at Rādhā, seated on a throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahmā Fire.

[Ch 13 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Since the beginning of creation, She is the Sole Lady of innumerable Brahmās and She is Eternal. At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady so beautiful and having no beginning nor end.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Since the beginning of creation, She is the Sole Lady of innumerable Brahmās and She is Eternal. At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady so beautiful and so qualified.

[Ch 13 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She was auspicious, well endowed with all auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good fortune of having a best husband. She was the foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeared as if all the beauties were concentrated in Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She was auspicious, well endowed with all auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good fortune of having a best husband. She was the foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeared as if all the beauties were concentrated in Her.

[Ch 13 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Rādhā is the (left) half of Śrī Krṣna's body; whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was in every was perfectly equal to Śrī Krṣna. Lakṣmī and the Lord of Lakṣmī both worship Rādhā. The excellent brilliance of Śrī Krṣna was overpowered by the beauty of Rādhā. Taking Her seat on the throne She began to chew betals offered by Her attendants (Sakhīs).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Rādhā is the (left) half of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body; whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was in every way perfectly equal to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Lakṣmī and the Lord of Lakṣmī both worship Rādhā. The excellent brilliance of Srī Kṛṣṇa was overpowered by the beauty of Rādhā. Taking Her seat on the throne She began to chew betels offered by Her attendants (Sakhīs).

[Ch 13 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no one is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and proud. She is the Ruling Lady of Śrī Krṣna's Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prāna (vital breath).
NEW CORR ENG ──► She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no one is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and proud. She is the Ruling Lady of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prāṇa (vital breath).

[Ch 13 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Devarsj! Gangā, the Governess of the Devas, looked at Her over and over again with a steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this moment, Radhā addressed smilingly to Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the world, humble and in sweet words.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Devarṣi! Gaṅgā, the Governess of the Devas, looked at Her over and over again with a steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this moment, Rādhā addressed smilingly to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the world, humbly and in sweet words.

[Ch 13 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is enchanted with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is frequently looking at Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is enchanted with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is frequently looking at Thee.

[Ch 13 Verse 43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with desires. What are all these? Even during My presence in this Goloka, all these bad practices are being rampant.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with desires. What are all these? Even during My presence in this Goloka, all these bad practices are being rampant.

[Ch 13 Verse 44-45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often! We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this Goloka. Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often! We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this Goloka. Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee.

[Ch 13 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Firstly, One day I saw Thee, united with Virajā Gopi, in Candana (Sandal wood) forest. What to do? At the request of the Sakhīs, I did forgive Thee. Then, hearing My footsteps, Thou didst fly away. Virajā, out of shame, quitted Her body and assumed the form of a river.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Firstly, one day I saw Thee, united with Virajā Gopī, in Chandana (Sandal wood) forest. What to do? At the request of the Śakhīs, I did forgive Thee. Then, hearing My footsteps Thou didst fly away. Virajā, out of shame, quitted Her body and assumed the form of a river.

[Ch 13 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That is million Yojanas wide and four times as long. Even to this day Virajā is existing, testifying to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannātha)! When I went back to My home Thou didst go to Virajā again and cried aloud ‘O Viraje! O Viraje!’
NEW CORR ENG ──► That is million Yojanas wide an four times as long. Even to this day that Virajā is existing, testifying to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannātha)! When I went back to My home Thou didst go to Virajā again and cried aloud “O Viraje! O Viraje!”

[Ch 13 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing Your cry, Virajā, the Siddha Yogini arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance, decked with ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to the casting of that seed in the womb of Virajā that the seven oceans have come into existence!
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing Your cry, Virajā, the Siddha Yoginī arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance decked with ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to the casting of that seed in the womb of Virajā that the seven oceans have come into existence!

[Ch 13 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Secondly—One day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the Gopi named Śobhā! Hearing My footsteps, Thou fled'st away that day also. Out of shame Śobhā quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of Moon (Candra Mandal). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to this Śobhā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Secondly, one day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the Gopī named Śobhā! Hearing My footsteps, Thou fled’st away that day also. Out of shame Śobhā quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of Moon (Candra Manḍal). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to this Śobhā.

[Ch 13 Verse 54-56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śobhā was thus distressed, Thou didst divide Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to excellent pearls and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to purified materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and partly to milk.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śobhā was thus distressed, Thou didst divide Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to excellent pearls and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to purified materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and partly to milk.

[Ch 13 Verse 57-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thirdly—I saw Thee united with Prabhā Gopi in Vrndāvana. Thou fled’s at away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, Prabhā quitted Her body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhā (lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of the pangs of separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabhā and didst put some parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yaksas, partly into lions, among men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vaiṣṇavas, partly in serpents, partly in Brāhmaṇas, partly in Munis, partly in ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thirdly, I saw Thee united with Prabhā Gopī in Brindāban. Thou fled’st away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, Prabhā quitted Her body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhā (lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of the pangs of separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabhā and didst put some parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yakṣas, partly into lions, among men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vaiṣṇavas, partly in serpents, partly in Brāhmaṇas, partly in Munis, partly in ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies.

[Ch 13 Verse 62-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou hadst to weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabha, for Her separation and and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the Gopi Śānti in Rāsa Manḍalam. On the coming of the spring season, one day Thou with garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body besmeard with sandal paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping on a bed of flowers with Śānti Gopi, decked with gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou hadst to weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabhā, for Her separation and and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the Gopī Śānti in Rāsa Manḍalam. On the coming of the spring season, one day Thou with garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body besmeared with sandal paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping on a bed of flowers with Śānti Gopī, decked with gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved.

[Ch 13 Verse 66-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing My sound Thou fled'st away. Sānti Gopī, too, out of fear and shame quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore Śānti is reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of separation. Thou didst divide the body of Śānti and distributed partly to forests, partly to Brahmā, partly to Me, partly to Śuddha Sattvā Lakṣmī, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to the religions persons.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing My sound Thou fled’st away. Śānti Gopī, too, out of fear and shame quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore Śānti is reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of separation, Thou didst divide the body of Śānti and distributed partly to forests, partly to Brahmā, partly to Me, partly to Śuddha Sattvā Lakṣmī, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to the religious persons.

[Ch 13 Verse 70-71]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fifthly—Dost Thou remember that one day anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good scent and with garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast sleeping with Kṣamā (forgiveness) Gopī in ease and happiness, on a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well scented.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fifthly, dost Thou remember that one day anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good scent and with garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast sleeping with Kṣamā (forgiveness) Gopī in ease and happiness, on a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well scented.

[Ch 13 Verse 72-73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou wert so much overpowered by sleep after fresh intercourse that when I went and disturbed, then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Murali (flute), garlands made forest, Kaustubha gems, and invaluable earrings of pearls and gems.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou wert so much over-powered by sleep after fresh intercourse that when I went and disturbed, then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Muralī (flute), garlands made of forest flowers, Kaustubha gems, and invaluable earrings of pearls and gems.

[Ch 13 Verse 74-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► I gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of the Sakhis. Thy body turned black with sin and dire shame. Kṣamā then quitted Her body out of shame and went down to the earth. Therefore Kṣamā turned out to be the repository of best qualifies. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body and distributed them partly to Viṣṇu, partly to the Vaiṣṇavas partly to Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak persons, partly to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the Pandits (literary persons).
NEW CORR ENG ──► I gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of the Śakhīs. Thy body turned black with sin and dire shame, Kṣamā then quitted Her body out of shame and went down to the earth. Therefore Kṣamā turned out to be the repository of best qualities. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body and distributed them partly to Viṣṇu, partly to the Vaiṣṇavas, partly to Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak persons, partly to ascetics,

[Ch 13 Verse 78-79]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as far as I know. What more dost Thou want to hear? Thou hast many qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus eyed Rādhā began to rebuke Gāngā sitting by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa with Her head bent low out of shame.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as far as I know. What more dost thou want to hear? Thou hast many more qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus eyed Rādhā began to rebuke Gaṅgā sitting by the side of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with Her head bent low out of shame.

[Ch 13 Verse 80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At this time Gāngā, who was a Siddha Yogini came to know all the mysteries, and instantly disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► At this time Gaṅgā, who was a Siddha Yoginī came to know all the mysteries, and instantly disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form.

[Ch 13 Verse 81-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Siddha Yogini Rādhā came to know also, by Her Yogic power, the secrets of Ganga and became ready to drink the whole water in one sip. Ganga, knowing this intention of Rādhā, by Her Yogic power, took refuge of Krṣṇa and entered into His feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Siddha Yoginī Rādhā came to know also, by Her Yogic power, the secrets of Gaṅgā and became ready to drink the whole water in one sip. Gaṅgā, knowing this intention of Rādhā, by Her Yogic power, took refuge of Kṛṣṇa and entered into His feet.

[Ch 13 Verse 83-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Rādhā began to look out for Gāngā everywhere: First She searched in Goloka, then Vaikuntha, then Brahma-loka; then She searched all the Lokas one by one but nowhere did She find Gāngā. All the places in Goloka became void of of water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic animals died and fell to the ground.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Rādhā began to look out for Gaṅgā everywhere :-- First She searched in Goloka, then Vaikuṇṭha, then Brahmā-loka; then She searched all the Lokas one by one but no where did She find Gaṅgā. All the places in Goloka became void of of water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic animals died and fell to the ground.

[Ch 13 Verse 85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Ananta, Dharma Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics all became very thirsty and their throats became parched.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Ananta, Dharma, Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics all became very thirsty and their throats became parched.

[Ch 13 Verse 86-89]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then went to Goloka, and bowed down with devotion to Śri Krṣṇa, Who was the Lord of all, beyond Prakṛti, the Supreme, worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and the Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and Gopis; Who is formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge, attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth, the Witness and eternal Puruṣa, and Who is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began to hymn Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then went to Goloka, and bowed down with devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Who was the Lord of all, beyond Prakriti, the Supreme, worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and the Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and Gopīs; Who is formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge, attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth, the Witness and eternal Puruṣa and Who is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began to hymn Him.

[Ch 13 Verse 90-91]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All were filled with intense feelings with devotion; tears of love were flowing from their eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstasy, the hairs standing in ends.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All were filled with intense feelings with devotion; tears of love were flowing from their eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstasy, the hairs standing in ends.

[Ch 13 Verse 92-95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He was Para Brahma; His Substance was made of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the Gopas with white chowries, who was seeing hearing with great delight, and smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopis, who was chewing the scented betel offered by Rādhā and who residing in the heart of His dearest Śrī Rādhā, who was the Perfect, all pervading, and the Lord of the Rāsa Circle. The Manus, Munis, and the ascetics all bowed down to Śri Kṛṣna, no sooner they beheld Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He was Para Brahmā; His Substance was made of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the Gopas with white chowries, who was seeing and hearing with great delight, and smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopīs, who was chewing the scented betel offered by Rādhā and who was residing in. the heart of His dearest Śrī Rādhā, who was the Perfect, all pervading, and the Lord of the Rāsa Circle. The Manus, Munis, and the ascetics all bowed down to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, no sooner they beheld Him.

[Ch 13 Verse 96-98]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their hearts. They then looked at one another and gave over to Brahmā the task of communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahmā, with Viṣṇu on His right and Vāma Deva on His left, gradually came in front of Śrī Krṣṇa. Wherever He cast His glance in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam, He saw Śrī Krṣṇa, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of the Highest Bliss, sitting.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their hearts. They then looked at one another and gave over to Brahmā the task of communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahmā, with Viṣṇu on His right and Vāma Deva on His left, gradually came in front of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Wherever He cast His glance in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam, He saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature

[Ch 13 Verse 99-101]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All have turned out Krṣnas; their seats were all uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their hands; on every one's neck is the forest garland; peacock's tail was on the top of everyone's crest and Kaustubha jewels were on and their breasts. The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and very peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no respect no one was inferior to another.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All have turned out Kṛṣṇas; their seats were all uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their hands; on every one’s neck is the forest garland; peacock’s tail was on the top of everyone’s crest and Kaustubha jewels were on all their breasts. The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and very peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no respect no one was inferior to another.

[Ch 13 Verse 102-103]
OLD OCR ENG ──► No one was imperfect; no one was deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out who was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is seen in His Teja form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes Formless; sometimes with form; and again sometimes both with and without form.
NEW CORR ENG ──► no one was deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out who was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is seen in His Teja form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes Formless; sometimes with form; and again sometimes both with and without form.

[Ch 13 Verse 104-105]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sometimes there is no Rādhā; there is only Krṣṇa; And sometimes again in every seat there is the Yugal Mūrti Rādhā and Krṣṇa combined. Sometimes Rādhā assumes the form of Krṣṇa. So the Creator Brahmā could not make out whether Śrī Krṣṇa was a female or a male. At last He meditated on Śrī Krṣṇa in his heart-lotus and began to chant hymns to Him with devotion and prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sometimes there is no Rādhā; there is only Kṛṣṇa; And sometimes again in every seat there is the Yugal Murti Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa combined. Sometimes Rādhā assumes the form of Kṛṣṇa. So the Creator Brahmā could not make out whether Śrī Kṛṣṇa was a female or a male. At last He meditated on Śrī Kṛṣṇa in his heart-lotus and began to chant hymns to Him with devotion and prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings.

[Ch 13 Verse 106-107]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When Śrī Krṣṇa got pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw Śrī Krṣṇa on the breast of Śrī Rādhā. There were His attendants on all the sides and the Gopīs all around. Seeing this, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara bowed down to Him and sang His praises.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When Śrī Kṛṣṇa got pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the breast of Śrī Rādhā. There were His attendants on all the sides and the Gopīs all around. Seeing this, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara bowed down to Him and sang His praises.

[Ch 13 Verse 108-110]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī', the Omnipresent Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, separately said: "O Brahaman! Is it all well with you? O Lord of Kamala! Come here. O Mahādeva! Come here; let all be well to you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī, the Omnipresent, Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, separately said :-- “O Brahmān! Is it all well with you? O Lord of Kamalā! Come here. O Mahādeva! Come here; let all be well to you.

[Ch 13 Verse 111-112]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You all have come to me for Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā has taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Rādhā. Seeing Gaṅgā by My side, Rādhā wanted to drink Her up. However I will give over Gaṅgā to the hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Rādhā, so that Gāngā becomes fearless of Her.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You all have come to me for Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā has taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Rādhā. Seeing Gaṅgā by My side, Rādhā wanted to drink Her up, However I will give over Gaṅgā to the hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Rādhā, so that Gaṅgā becomes fearless of Her.”

[Ch 13 Verse 113-114]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lotus born Brahmā smiled at Śrī Krṣṇa's words and began to sing hymns to Rādhā, Who is fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahmā, the Compiler of the Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Rādhā with His Four heads, bent low and addressed Her thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lotus born Brahmā smiled at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s words and began to sing hymns to Rādhā, Who is fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahmā, the Compiler of the Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Rādhā with His Four heads, bent low and addressed Her thus :--

[Ch 13 Verse 115-116]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā said: “O Rādhle’ Gaṅgā, appeared from Thee and the Lord Śrī Krṣna. Both of you were transformed before into the liquid forms in the Rāsā Maṇḍalam, on hearing the music of Śaṅkara. And That Liquid Form is Gaṅgā. So She is born of Thee and Śrī Krṣna. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as such. She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā said :-- “O Rādhe! Gaṅgā, appeared from Thee and the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Both of you were transformed before into the liquid forms in the Rāṣā Maṇḍalam, on hearing the music of Śaṅkara. And That Lquid Form is Gaṅgā. So She is born of Thee and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as such. She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee.

[Ch 13 Verse 117-118]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four armed Lord of Vaikuntha will be Her husband. And when She will appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband, O Mother! The Ganga that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self born daughter."
NEW CORR ENG ──► The four armed Lord of Vaikuṇṭha will be Her husband. And when She will appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband. O Mother! The Gaṅgā that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self born daughter.”

[Ch 13 Verse 119-121]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing, thus, the words of Brahma \( ^{1} \) , Rādhā gave Her assent towards the protection of Ganga. And then Ganga appeared from the toe-tip of Śri Krṣna. The liquid Ganga, then, assumed Her own form and, getting up from water, was received with great honour by the Devas. Bhagavān Brahma \( ^{1} \) took a little of that Ganges water in His Kamandalu and Bhagavān Mahādeva kept some of it in His own head.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing thus, the words of Brahmā, Rādhā gave Her assent towards the protection of Gaṅgā. And then Gaṅgā appeared from the toe-tip of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The liquid Gaṅgā, then, assumed Her own form and, getting up from water, was received with great honour by the Devas. Bhagavān Brahmā took a little of that Ganges water in His Kamaṇḍalu and Bhagavān Mahādeva kept some of it in His own head.

[Ch 13 Verse 122-123]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lotus born Brahmā, then, initiated Gāngā into the Rādhā Mantra and gave Her instructions, Rādhā Stotra (hymn of Rādhā) according to the Sāma Veda, Rādhā Kavaca (protection mantras), Rādhā Dhyān (meditation on Rādhā), method of worship of Rādhā, and Rādhā's puracsaraṇa. Gāngā worshipped Rādhā according to these instructions and went to Vaikunṭha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lotus born Brahmā, then, initiated Gaṅgā into the Rādhā Mantra and gave Her instructions, Rādhā Stotra (hymn of Rādhā) according to the Sāma Veda, Rādhā Kavaca (protection mantras), Rādhā Dhyān (meditation on Rādhā), method of worship of Rādhā, and Rādhā’s puraṣcaraṇa. Gaṅgā worshipped Rādhā according to those instructions and went to Vaikuṇṭha.

[Ch 13 Verse 124-125]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Gaṅgā, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four became the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Kṛṣṇa, then, smiled and explained to Brahmā the history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Gaṅgā, and the world purifying Tulasī, these four became the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Kṛṣṇa, then, smiled and explained to Brahmā the history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others.

[Ch 13 Verse 126-127]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He then spoke: "O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Maheśvara! Now you better take Gaghā and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by this time. Hear. You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, Siddhas, and other Mahātmās that are present here, are living now. For this region of Goloka is not affected by Kāla (Time). Now the Kalpa is going to expire.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He then spoke :-- “O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Maheśvara! Now you better take Gaṅgā and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by this time. Hear. 126-136. You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, Siddhas, and other Mahātmās that are present here, are living now. For this region of Goloka is not affected by Kāla (Time). Now the Kalpa is going to expire.

[Ch 13 Verse 128-129]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So in the other regions than Goloka and Vaikunthā, the Brahmās, etc., that were existing in all other Universes, have all now dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and Vaikunthā, all are now under water, the pre-state of earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So in the other regions than Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha, the Brahmās, etc., that were existing in all other Universes, have all now dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha, all are now under water, the pre-state of earth.

[Ch 13 Verse 130-131]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Batter go and create your own Brahmāṇḍas and Ganga will go to that newly created Brahmāṇḍa. I will also create other worlds and the Brahmās thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do your own works respectively.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better go and create your own Brahmāṇḍas and Gaṅgā will go to that newly created Brahmāṇḍa. I will also create other worlds and the Brahmās thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do your own works respectively.

[Ch 13 Verse 132-133]
OLD OCR ENG ──► You have waited here for a long interval. As many Brahmās that have fallen all appear again." Thus saying Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Rādhā went to His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly retired from that spot and engaged themselves earnestly in the creation work.
NEW CORR ENG ──► You have waited here for a long interval. As many Brahmās that have fallen all appear again.” Thus saying Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Rādhā went to His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly retired from that spot and engaged themselves earnestly in the creation work.

[Ch 13 Verse 134-136]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Gangā remained as before till then in the region of Goloka, Vaikuntha, Śivaloka, Brahma-loka, and in other places, by the command of Śri Kṛṣṇa. She is named Viṣṇupadī, because She appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu. Thus I have described to you this pleasant, essential story of Gāngā, leading to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter the anecdote of Gāngā in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Gaṅgā remained as before till then in the region of Goloka, Vaikuṇṭha, Śivaloka, Brahmā-loka, and in other places, by the command of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is named Viṣṇupadī, because She appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu. Thus I have described to you this pleasant, essential story of Gaṅgā, leading to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say. Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the anecdote of Gaṅgā in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
