CHAPTER XIII

On the Anecdote of the Gaṅgā

नारद उवाच

क्रलेः पझसह्वावे समितीते सुरेश्वर ।

व्व गता सा महाभाग तन्मे व्याख्यामुदर्शिति ॥ 1 ॥

Nārada said: O Lord for of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did Gaṅgā go after 5000 (five thousand) year of the Kali Yuga?

श्रीनारायण उवाच

भारतं भारतीशाणात्समागत्येश्वरैच्छया ।

जगाम तत्र वैकुंठे शपान्ते पुनेर्व सा ॥ 2 ॥

भारती भारतं त्यक्ल्या तज्जगाम हरे: पदम् ।

पद्यावती च शपानंे गंगा सा चैव नादा ॥ 3 ॥

गंगा सरस्वती लक्ष्मीक्षौतासित्रवः पिया हरेः ।

तुलसीसहिता ब्ब्रांधतवः क्रीर्तितः शुतौ ॥ 4 ॥

Nārāyana said: The Bhāgirathi Gāngā came down to Bhārata under the course of Bhāratī; and when, the term expired, She went back, be the Will

Book IX Chapter XIII

of God, to the region of Vaikuntha. Also at the end of the period of their curses, Bhārati and, Lakṣmī, too, left Bhārata and repaired to Nārāyaṇa. Gaṅgā, Lakṣmī, and Sarasvati, these three and Tulasi all these four are so very dear to Śrī Hari.

नारद उवाच

केनोपायेन सा देवी विष्णुपादाङ्गसंभवा ।

ब्रह्मकंदलुस्था च श्रुता शिवप्रिया च सा ॥ 5 ॥

बधूव सा मुनिश्रेष्ठ गंगा नारावणप्रिया ।

अही केन प्रकारेण तमे व्याख्यातुमहींस ॥ 6 ॥

Nārad said: How did Gaṅgā appear from the lotus feet of Viṣṇu? Why did Brahmā put Her in His Kamandalu? I have heard that Gaṅgā is the wife of Śiva; how then, came She to be the wife of Nārāyaṇa? Kindly describe all these jn detail to me.

शीनारायण उवाच

पुरा बधूव गोलेके सा गंगा उवाकपिणी ।

राधाकृष्णातुसंपृतं तदंशा तत्स्वकपिणी ॥ ७ ॥

इवाधिष्यादुर्वी या रूपेणाप्रतिमा भुवि ।

नवयीवनसंप्रा सर्वाभरणभूषिता ॥ 8 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of Goloka, Gāngā assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the bodies of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So she is of the nature of both of them and their parts. Gāngā is the presiding deity, of water. She is unequalled in Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and adorned with all ornaments.

शनमध्याहुष्यास्या सस्मिता सुमनोहरा ।

तपाकाङ्गवर्णिभा शरचंद्रसमप्रभा ॥ 9 ॥

Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile was always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the Autumnal Moon.

सिभ्यप्रभाउसुसिन्घा शुव्रसचवरूषिणी ।

सुर्पानकतिजशोधि: सुनितंबुर्भाग्धा ॥ 10 ॥

पौनोत्रतं सुकाटिनं स्ननयुमं सुवर्तुलम् ।

सुचाफेनप्रयुगलं सुकाटिशं सुर्वकिंमम् ॥ 11 ॥

Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Śuddha Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard and She was covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. Her breasts were plump and prominent; they were raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very fascinating, always casting side-long glances.

वंकिमं कवरीभरं माल्लीमाल्यसंयुतम् ।

सिंदूरविंदुल्लितं सार्थं चन्दनविंदुर्भिः ॥ 12 ॥

कस्तूरीविकायुक्तं गंडयुगमं मनोरमम् ।

बंधूककुसुमाकामयरोई च सुंदरम् ॥ 13 ॥

Her braids of hair situated a little oblique and the garland of Málati flowers over it made Her look extremely handsome. The sandal-paste dot and the vermilion dot were seen on Her fore-head. On Her cheeks the leaves of musk were drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhūka flowers and they looked enchanting.

पव्वदाडिवबीजाभदंतपंक्तिसमुज्जलम् ।

वाससी वक्षिषुड़े च नीवीयुक्ते च विषिति ॥ 14 ॥

सा सकामा कृष्णायईं समुवास सुलजिता ।

वाससा मुखामछाठ लोचनाथा विभीभुंखम् ॥ 15 ॥

नियेबरहिताभ्यां च विष्वती सततं मुदा ।

प्रफुललवदना हर्षत्रवसंगमालकसा ॥ 16 ॥

Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe promegranates; the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in front in a know round the waist She sat by the side of Krṣṇa, full of amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end of Her cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gage the face of the Lord and She was drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. Her lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at the expectation of a first amorous embrace.

मृच्छिता प्रभृकरणे पुल्कांकितविद्याह ।

एतसिम्बोतर तर्य विद्याना च राधिका ॥ १ ७ ॥

गोपीत्रिंशकोंदितुका कोदिचन्द्रसमप्रभा ।

कोपेनार्तकपाताया रत्कपेकजलोचना ॥ १ ८ ॥

She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord and a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

meanwhile Rādhikā came up there. Rādhā was attended by thirty kotis of Gopīs. She looked brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing Gaṅgā by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa, Her face and eyes became reddened with anger like a red lotus.

पीता चंपकदाणिभा गजेन्रंदगामिनी ।

अमूल्यत्निमिणानानामृष्णभूषिता ॥ 19 ॥

अमूल्यत्नखितमामूल्यं बहिहरणीचकम् ।

पीतवस्त्रस्य युगलं नीवीयुक्तं च विधती ॥ 20 ॥

Her colour was yellow like campaka and Her gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned with various invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and not inflammable by fire. (fire-proof).

स्थलवशुभाषयुं कोमलं च सुरिंजितम् ।

कृष्णदात्ध्येयंसुंकृं विद्यसंसती पर्विबुजम् ॥ 21 ॥

रलेन्द्रसारनिर्माणियमानादरकृष्ण सा ।

सेव्यमाना च ऋषिधिभः क्षेत्तभारमयातुम् ॥ 22 ॥

The Arghya offered by Śrī Krṣṇa was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowing shrub-Bibiscus mutabilis and She was going slowly step by step. The Rṣis began to fan Her with white Cāmaras no sooner She, descending from the excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk.

कस्पूरीविंदुभियुंक् चन्दनेन समवित्न् ।

दीपदीपप्रभाकारं सिंदूरं विदुरोगिभन् ॥ 2 3 ॥

द्यती भालमध्ये च सीमंताधः स्वलोज्जले ।

पारिज्ञातम्युनाां मालयुक्ते सुवैकिम्न ॥ 24 ॥

Below the pont where the parting of the hairs on the head is done, there was the dot of Sindūra on Her fore-head. If looked brilliant like a bright lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindūrabindu, the dot of musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver with anger, Her braid, with Pārijāta round it began to tremble also.

सुचाक्रकवीभारं कंपयतीं सुकंपिता ।

सुचाक्रतारसंयुक्तभोई कंपयतीं रूपा ॥ 25 ॥

गल्योवास कृष्णवार्थे रनसिंहासने रुषे ।

सखीनं च समूहैश्य परिपूर्णी विभोः प्रिया ॥ 26 ॥

Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. She took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side Śrī Krṣṇa. Her attendants took their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing Rādhā, Śrī Krṣṇa got up at once from His seat with reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her in sweet words.

तां दुब्धा च समुतस्यी कृष्ण: सादरपूर्वकम् ।

संभाव्य मयुतालपे: सस्मित्तु ससंभमः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रणोगुरितसंसरला गोपा नवात्मकंधराः ।

तुबुदुप्ते च भकत्ता च तुहाव परमेश्वरः ॥ 28 ॥

The Gopís, very much afraid and with their heads bent low, began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. Śrī Krṣṇa also began to praise Her with stotras. At this moment Gaṅgā Devi got up and praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and with humble words. Out of fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up.

उत्थाय गंगा सहसा स्तुति बहु चकार सा ।

कुशलें परिपृष्छ भीताउतिनिवने ॥ 29 ॥

नप्रभागसिता जस्ता शुक्रकपडोहतालुका ।

ध्यानेन शरणायत्ता श्रीकृष्णचरणाङ्गुले ॥ 30 ॥

She took refuge humbly at Śrī Kṛṣṇa's feet. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then took Gaṅgā Devi on His breast when She became calm and quiet. At this interval Suresvari Gaṅgā looked at Rādhā, seated on a throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahma Fire.

तां ह्वच्यित्वां कृष्णो घीताढे चाभयं ददौ ।

बभुव स्थिरचिता सा सर्वेश्वरोण च ॥ ३१ ॥

कर्णविसंहासनस्थां च राधां गंगा ददर्ग सा ।

सुनिरभ्यां सुखदूर्यां च जल्लोंं बहानेसा ॥ ३२ ॥

Since the beginning of creation, She is the Sole Lady of innumerable Brahmās and She is Eternal. At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady so beautiful and having no beginning nor end.

असंख्यक्रहणः कार्मादिरुहेः सनातनीम् ।

सदा द्वारुषार्थीं कन्याभिनवर्याविनाम् ॥ 33 ॥

Book IX Chapter XIII

विश्ववन्धा निरूपमां क्लेषण च गुणेन च ।

शांतां कातामनंततात्माधतरितां सतीम् ॥ 34 ॥

She was auspicious, well endowed with all auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good fortune of having a best husband. She was the foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeared as if all the beauties were concentrated in Her.

शुभां सुमारं सुभगां स्वामिसीभाग्यसंगुतम् ।


सौदर्यैंदुरी श्रेष्ठं सर्वायु सुंदरीषु च ॥ 35  ॥

कृष्णाधारी कृष्णसामं तेसला वसला तिथा ।

पूर्तितं च महलक्ष्मी लक्ष्म्या लक्ष्मीश्रेणा च ॥ 36 ॥

Rādhā is the (left) half of Śrī Krṣna's body; whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was in every was perfectly equal to Śrī Krṣna. Lakṣmī and the Lord of Lakṣmī both worship Rādhā. The excellent brilliance of Śrī Krṣna was overpowered by the beauty of Rādhā. Taking Her seat on the throne She began to chew betals offered by Her attendants (Sakhīs).

प्रच्छाद्यानां प्रभवा समामीग्रस्य सुप्रभाम् ।

सखीदन्तं च त्रांकुरुं भृक्तवर्तीं च दुर्वभम् । 37 ॥

अजन्यां सर्वेक्ननीं धन्यां मान्यां च मानिनीम् ।

कृष्णप्राणाधियेदेची च प्राणाधियतमां रामम् ॥ 38 ॥

She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no one is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and proud. She is the Ruling Lady of Śrī Krṣna's Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prāna (vital breath).

दूषा रासेभरीं तृषितं न जगाम सुरेशृते ।

निवेशहिताभयं व लोचनाभयं पची च ताम ॥ 39 ॥

तृलस्मिन्ते राशा जगदीशमुवाच सा ।

वाचा मभुर्या शांता विनीता सस्मिता मुने ॥ 40 ॥

O Devarsj! Gangā, the Governess of the Devas, looked at Her over and over again with a steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this moment, Radhā addressed smilingly to Śri Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the world, humble and in sweet words.

राधोवाच

कैयं प्राणेश कल्पाणी समिता तत्मुखांबुजम् ।

पर्यंती समितां पार्शे सकामा वकलोचना ॥ 41 ॥

मूर्डी प्राप्तोति रूपेण पुलकांकितविश्रा ।

वर्येण मुख्यामच्छादि निरीक्षनी पुनः पुनः ॥ 42 ॥

O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is enchanted with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is frequently looking at Thee.

त्वे चापि तां संनिरीक्ष्य सकामः समितः सदा ।

मयि जीवित गोलोके भूता तुबूचितीरुगी ॥ 43 ॥

Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with desires. What are all these? Even during My presence in this Goloka, all these bad practices are being rampant.

त्वमेव चैव दुर्बर्तं वारं वारं करोषि च ।

क्ष्मां कंपीरि प्रेणा च क्ली जातिः सिन्ध्यमानस ।। 44 ॥

संगृहोमां पियामिषां गोलोकाद्रच्छ लंपर ।

अन्यथा न हि ते भई भविष्यति ब्रजेश्व ॥ 45 ॥

It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often! We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this Goloka. Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee.

दृष्टस्तं चिरजायुक्तो मया चंदनकानने ।

क्षमा कृता मया पूर्व सखीनीं वचनाएहो ॥ 46 ॥

त्वया मच्छद्वमावेण तिरोधानं कृतं पुरा ।

देई तत्वाज चित्रा नदीरूपा बंधूव सा ॥ 47 ॥

Firstly, One day I saw Thee, united with Virajā Gopi, in Candana (Sandal wood) forest. What to do? At the request of the Sakhīs, I did forgive Thee. Then, hearing My footsteps, Thou didst fly away. Virajā, out of shame, quitted Her body and assumed the form of a river.

कोटियोजनविस्तीर्णां तते देयें चतुर्णग ।

अशापि विद्यामाना सा तव स्क्लोर्स्तीर्विणी ॥ 48 ॥

गृहं मायि नातायां च पुनर्गत्वा तद्यक्ति ।

उद्दे करोद विजरे विजरे चेते संस्मरन् ॥ 49 ॥

That is million Yojanas wide and four times as

long. Even to this day Virajā is existing, testifying to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannātha)! When I went back to My home Thou didst go to Virajā again and cried aloud ‘O Viraje! O Viraje!’

तदा तोतास्तमुखाया स योगात्सिद्ध्योगिनी ।

सालकता मृतिंमती ददी तुभच्च दर्जनम् ॥ 50 ॥

ततस्तां च समाधिष्य वीधधानं कृतं तवा ।

ततो बधुतुस्तया च समुत्रा: सदा एव च ॥ 51 ॥

Hearing Your cry, Virajā, the Siddha Yogini arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance, decked with ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to the casting of that seed in the womb of Virajā that the seven oceans have come into existence!

दृष्टस्वं शोभया गोया युक्त्धधककानं ।

सदो मच्छद्माजेण तितोधानं कृतं त्वया ॥ 5 2 ॥

गोभा देई परित्यज जगाम चंद्रमंडले ।

तततस्वा: शरीरं च सिन्धो तेजो कपूव ह ॥ 5 3 ॥

Secondly—One day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the Gopi named Śobhā! Hearing My footsteps, Thou fled'st away that day also. Out of shame Śobhā quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of Moon (Candra Mandal). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to this Śobhā.

संविभव क्यला दर्त हुदनेय विद्वता ।

तलाया किंचित्वल्पाय किंचिन्माणिवाराय च । ।५ ४ ।।

किंचित्कीणां मुखावेध्य: किंचित्दोत्रे किंचन ।

किंचित्सललेवेध्यधु पुचेध्यधारी किंचन ।। ५५ ।।

किंचित्कलेवय: पवेवेध्य: सस्येध्यापी किंचन ।

नुपदेवगृहेध्य प्रेस्कृतोषध्य किंचन ।। ५६ ॥।

When Śobhā was thus distressed, Thou didst divide Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to excellent pearls and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to purified materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and partly to milk.

किंचिन्न्तनपेध्यो दुर्घेध्यशापि किंचन ।

दृष्टस्वं प्रभया गोणया युक्तो युद्यावने चे । ५७ ॥

सहो मच्छद्धमाजेण तितीधानं कृतं तत्वा ।

प्रमा देई पौरित्यज जागम सूर्मंबछे ॥ ५८ ॥ ।

तततस्वा: शरीरं च तीढ़े तेजो बभूव ह ।

संविभज्य तत्वा दर्त प्रेणा प्रकटता पुरा ॥ ५९ ॥

विसृष्टे चक्ष्योः कृष्ण लज्जया मढ़वेन च ।

हुतातानया किंचित्चच यक्षेभ्याशी किंचन ॥ 6 0 ॥

किंचित्युकभसिंहेभ्यो देवेभ्यशी किंचन ।

किंचिद्विषुजनैमध्ये जानीभोजीचे पिंचन ॥ 6 1 ॥

Thirdly—I saw Thee united with Prabhā Gopi in Vrndāvana. Thou fled’s at away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, Prabhā quitted Her body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhā (lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of the pangs of separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabhā and didst put some parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yaksas, partly into lions, among men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vaiṣṇavas, partly in serpents, partly in Brāhmaṇas, partly in Munis, partly in ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies.

ब्राह्मणीयो मुनिन्यश्र तपविश्यश्र किंचन ।

स्लीयः सीभाग्ययुक्तायो यगसिव्यश्र किंचन ॥ 62 ॥

ततु दत्ता च सर्वेध्य: पूर्व प्रक्रित्त तथा ।

शातिणीयो युतस्तचं च दृष्टोसि रासमंडते ॥ 63 ॥

वसंते पुण्यालयायां माल्ववांशंद्रनोक्षितः ।

तनप्रदीयैयुक्तं च तननिर्माणमंदिति ॥ 64 ॥

तन्युषाण्याष्ठां तन्यभूषिता सह ।

तया दर्न च तांवृर्तं भुक्तवांशं पुत्र विभो ॥ 65 ॥

Thou hadst to weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabha, for Her separation and and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the Gopi Śānti in Rāsa Manḍalam. On the coming of the spring season, one day Thou with garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body besmeard with sandal paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping on a bed of flowers with Śānti Gopi, decked with gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved.

Book IX Chapter XIII

सढो मच्छवमाप्रेश लितोधानं कृतं तत्वा ।

शर्नितैईं परित्यज भिया लीना तविय प्रभो ॥ 6 6 ॥

ततस्तत्या: शरीरं च गुणांश्रे बधूव ह ।

संविभज्य तव्या दर्ते प्रेण्या प्रकटता पुरा ॥ 67 ॥

विश्वे तु विविधे किंक्षिवद्बुक्षणे च माय प्रपे ।

गुद्वस्तचलक्षापै किंक्षिलक्ष्मये पुरा विधे ॥ 68 ॥

त्वन्मनोयासेक्यध्यु शालेन्यशुपीय किंचन ।

तत्यस्विष्यध्ये धार्यय दार्थीयेच्छ्य किंचन ॥ 69 ॥

Hearing My sound Thou fled'st away. Sānti Gopī, too, out of fear and shame quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore Śānti is reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of separation. Thou didst divide the body of Śānti and distributed partly to forests, partly to Brahmā, partly to Me, partly to Śuddha Sattvā Lakṣmī, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to the religions persons.

भवा पूर्वे च त्वं वृढ़ो गोया च क्षमया सह ।

सुवेयपुक्तो मालावानांधर्वंदनचर्चितः ॥ 70 ॥

तत्पश्चितया गंधचंदनोक्षितया सह ।

सुखेन भूष्टितस्तपे पुष्पचंदनचंचिते ॥ 71 ॥

Fifthly—Dost Thou remember that one day anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good scent and with garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast sleeping with Kṣamā (forgiveness) Gopī in ease and happiness, on a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well scented.

लिष्ठही निर्वित्रव सखः सुखेन नवसंगमात् ।

मया प्रवोधिता सा च भवांशु स्मरणं कृक ॥ ७२ ॥

गृहांतं पीतवस्वे च मुरली च मनोहरा ।

वनमालाकीस्तुषधायमूस्यं रत्नकुडलम् ॥ ७३ ॥

Thou wert so much overpowered by sleep after fresh intercourse that when I went and disturbed, then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Murali (flute), garlands made forest, Kaustubha gems, and invaluable earrings of pearls and gems.

पश्रातप्रदं प्रेमणा च सखीनीं वचनादहो ।

लज्जया कृष्णवाणों५भूद्वतायपानेय च: प्रभो ॥ 74 ॥

क्षमा देहे पतिर्यल्य लज्जया पृथिवी गता ।

तततस्प्या: शरीरं च गुणश्रेडे चभूच है ॥ 75 ॥

संविभन्य त्वया दर्त प्रेमणा प्रस्तत एपु: ।

किंविद्रतं चिणयोचेय्छ शिक्षणा चेथणावेय्छ शिक्षणा ॥ 76 ॥

धार्मिकेच्छध धार्यमे दुवंलेच्छ क्षिकन ।

तपरियेच्योरि देयेचेय: पंडितेच्छ क्षिकना ॥ 77 ॥

I gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of the Sakhis. Thy body turned black with sin and dire shame. Kṣamā then quitted Her body out of shame and went down to the earth. Therefore Kṣamā turned out to be the repository of best qualifies. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body and distributed them partly to Viṣṇu, partly to the Vaiṣṇavas partly to Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak persons, partly to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the Pandits (literary persons).

एतते कथितं सर्वे किं भूयः श्रोतृमिच्छसि ।

त्वरुणं चैव बहुगे न जतानिम परं प्रपो ॥ 78 ॥

इत्येवमुक्ल्वा सा राशा रक्लपंकजलोचना ।

गंगां वक्तुं सामोपे नापाखां लफ्जितां सतीम् ॥ 79 ॥

O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as far as I know. What more dost Thou want to hear? Thou hast many qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus eyed Rādhā began to rebuke Gāngā sitting by the side of Śrī Krṣṇa with Her head bent low out of shame.

नंगा रहस्यं विज्ञाय योगेन सिद्धयोगिनि ।

तिरोधूम सभामध्ये स्थलजं प्रविश्वेग सा ॥ 80 ॥

At this time Gāngā, who was a Siddha Yogini came to know all the mysteries, and instantly disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form.

राधा योगेन विज्ञाय सर्वैत्रावस्थितां च ताम ।

पानं कर्तुं सामारेपे गंड्वगासिद्योगीनि ॥ 81 ॥

गड़ा रहस्यं विज्ञाय योगेन सिद्योगीनि ।

श्रीकृष्णचरणांभोजे विशेष शरणं यदी ॥ 82 ॥

The Siddha Yogini Rādhā came to know also,

by Her Yogic power, the secrets of Ganga and became ready to drink the whole water in one sip. Ganga, knowing this intention of Rādhā, by Her Yogic power, took refuge of Krṣṇa and entered into His feet.

गोलेके सा च वैकुण्ठे ब्रह्मोलाक्रिके तथा ।

ददर्गे राशा सर्वेत्र नैव गड़ां ददर्गे सा ॥ 83 ॥

सर्वत्र जल्गूर्ण्यं च शुक्रधकंचे च गोलकम् ।

जलजंतुसमूहैश युतदेहैः सम्वित्वम् ॥ 84 ॥

Then Rādhā began to look out for Gāngā everywhere: First She searched in Goloka, then Vaikuntha, then Brahma-loka; then She searched all the Lokas one by one but nowhere did She find Gāngā. All the places in Goloka became void of of water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic animals died and fell to the ground.

ब्रह्माध्यिषावानंतधर्पेऋरिवाकारः ।

मनवो मुनवः सर्वे देवसिद्धतविचितः ॥ 85 ॥

And Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Ananta, Dharma Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics all became very thirsty and their throats became parched.

गोलोकं च समाजगु: शुक्कगढोहुतालुका: ।

सर्वे प्राणेपुरीविंदं सर्वेर्ग प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 86 ॥

वरं वेण्यायद्यविरिष्यवरकारणम् ।

गोपिकाणोपवृत्तानं सर्वेर्ग प्रवरम्यभुम् ॥ 87 ॥

निरीहज निराकारं निरिलिंचं च निराशयम् ।

निर्णीगं च निरस्त्यात् निर्विकारं निरज्जनम् ॥ 88 ॥

स्वेच्छामयं च साकारं भक्तानुप्रहाकारकम् ।

सत्त्वस्वलयं सल्येगं साहित्यरें सनातनम् ॥ 89 ॥

They then went to Goloka, and bowed down with devotion to Śri Krṣṇa, Who was the Lord of all, beyond Prakṛti, the Supreme, worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and the Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and Gopis; Who is formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge, attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth,

the Witness and eternal Puruṣa, and Who is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began to hymn Him.

परं परेणं परमं परमात्नामीक्षरम् ।

प्रणाय तुडुषुः सर्वे भक्तिनप्रात्मकन्धराः ॥ 90 ॥

सगदायादा: साक्षुनेत्रा: पुल्काकिकतियद्वाहः ।

सर्वे संरनुय सर्वेर्ग भगवंतं परात्यम् ॥ 91 ॥

All were filled with intense feelings with devotion; tears of love were flowing from their eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstasy, the hairs standing in ends.

ज्योतिर्यं परं बहा सर्वकारणकारणम् ।

अमूत्यरत्ननिर्माणिवारसिंहासनसित्यम् ॥ 92 ॥

सेव्यमानं च गोपालैः: शेतचामरावयुना ।

गोपालिकानृत्यति पर्यतं समिति मुदा ॥ 93 ॥

प्राणाधिक्रवितमं राधावस्थल्लिश्यन्ति ।

तया प्रदर्त तांबूलं भुकतवंतं सुवासितम् ॥ 94 ॥

परिपूर्णतां रासे दरुगृछ सुरोक्षम् ।

मुनयो मनवः सिद्धास्तपासघु तपविनः ॥ 95 ॥

He was Para Brahma; His Substance was made of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the Gopas with white chowries, who was seeing hearing with great delight, and smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopis, who was chewing the scented betel offered by Rādhā and who residing in the heart of His dearest Śrī Rādhā, who was the Perfect, all pervading, and the Lord of the Rāsa Circle. The Manus, Munis, and the ascetics all bowed down to Śri Kṛṣna, no sooner they beheld Him.

प्रहृत्यनसः सर्वे जम्युः परमविस्यम् ।

परस्यं समलोकय प्रोजुस्ते च चतुर्मुंखम् ॥ 96 ॥

निविदितं जगताथं स्वाधिप्रायमभीरितम् ।

बह्ना तद्वचनं शुत्वा विशुं कृत्वा स्वद्धिणी ॥ 97 ॥

वामाते वामदेवं च जगाम कृष्णसाठ्रितम् ।

पर्यान-वद्युक्तं च पर्यान-दर्शपिणम् ॥ 98 ॥

Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their

Book IX Chapter XIII

hearts. They then looked at one another and gave over to Brahmā the task of communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahmā, with Viṣṇu on His right and Vāma Deva on His left, gradually came in front of Śrī Krṣṇa. Wherever He cast His glance in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam, He saw Śrī Krṣṇa, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of the Highest Bliss, sitting.

सर्वे कृष्णायं धाता ददर्श रास्मडले ।

सर्वे समानवेशे च समानावसनंस्थितम् ॥ 99 ॥

दिषुर्जं भृलौहतं वनमालाविष्यपितम् ।

मयूरपिछ्छचूई च कौतुभुंने विश्राजितम् ॥ 100 ॥

अंतील कमनीयं च सुन्दरं शांनिविश्रमम् ।

गुणभूषणारूपेण तेजसा व्यसा त्रिष्ठा ॥ 101 ॥

All have turned out Krṣnas; their seats were all uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their hands; on every one's neck is the forest garland; peacock's tail was on the top of everyone's crest and Kaustubha jewels were on and their breasts. The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and very peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no respect no one was inferior to another.

परिपूर्णांम सर्वे सर्वेश्वर्यसप्तिवत् ।

कि सेल्य सेवकं किं वा युधा निवर्तमुकाम: ॥ 102 ॥

क्षणं तेजः:स्वल्पं च रूपं तत्र स्थितं क्षणम् ।

निरकारं च साकारं द्वर्शि द्विवधें क्षणम् ॥ 103 ॥

No one was imperfect; no one was deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out who was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is seen in His Teja form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes Formless; sometimes with form; and again sometimes both with and without form.

एकमेव क्षणं कृष्ण राधया रहितं परम् ।

प्रयेकासनसंखरं च तया साधै च तखणम् ॥ 104 ॥

राधाकपरं कृष्णं कृष्णाकरं कलजकम् ।

स्तीकरं च पुरुषं विधाता ध्यातुमक्षमः ॥ 105 ॥

Sometimes there is no Rādhā; there is only Krṣṇa; And sometimes again in every seat there is the Yugal Mūrti Rādhā and Krṣṇa combined. Sometimes Rādhā assumes the form of Krṣṇa. So the Creator Brahmā could not make out whether Śrī Krṣṇa was a female or a male. At last He meditated on Śrī Krṣṇa in his heart-lotus and began to chant hymns to Him with devotion and prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings.

हरवप्यर्थ च श्रीकृष्ण ध्याला ध्यानेन चक्षुषा ।

चकार तत्वां भक्यम पशित्रमनेकथा ॥ 106 ॥

ततः स्वच्छुक्नील्य पुनश्छ ततदुज्ञा ।

दूर्वर्ग कृष्णमेक च राधावक्षःस्थलसिंचन् ॥ 107 ॥

When Śrī Krṣṇa got pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw Śrī Krṣṇa on the breast of Śrī Rādhā. There were His attendants on all the sides and the Gopīs all around. Seeing this, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara bowed down to Him and sang His praises.

स्वपार्थै: परिवृतं गोपीमंडलभंडितम् ।

पुनः प्रणीपुन्ते चूदा तुवुः परपेक्षम् ॥ 108 ॥

तत्विभ्यायमात्राय तानुवाच रमेशः ।

सर्वात्मा स च सर्वेत्र: सर्वेश: सर्वेभावन: ॥ 109 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

आगच्छ कुर्सलं बढ़ाराजागच्छ कमलपते ।

इहागच्छ महदेव शशकृतुशलमसु वः ॥ 110 ॥

Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Lakṣmī', the Omnipresent Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, separately said: "O Brahaman! Is it all well with you? O Lord of Kamala! Come here. O Mahādeva! Come here; let all be well to you.

आगता हि महाभाग गड़ान्यकरणात् ।

गड़ा च चरणामधोके घयेन ग्रणगं नात ॥ 1 1 1 ॥

राघे में पातुपिछन्त्री द्वुंगा मसचिधानतः ।

दाख्यामीमां च भवति यूयं कुक्त निर्भयाम् ॥ 112 ॥

You all have come to me for Gaṅgā. Gaṅgā has taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Rādhā. Seeing Gaṅgā by My side, Rādhā wanted to drink Her up. However I will give over Gaṅgā to the

hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Rādhā, so that Gāngā becomes fearless of Her.

श्रीकृष्यय वचः शुचा ससितः कमलेद्रः।

गुहार राधामात्यां श्रीकृष्यानिरूपजितम् ॥ 113 ॥

वकत्रैशुर्पिः संस्तुय भक्तिभ्यातकंधरः ।

धाता चतुर्णां वेदानामुवाच चतुर्नानः ॥ 114 ॥

The lotus born Brahmā smiled at Śrī Krṣṇa's words and began to sing hymns to Rādhā, Who is fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahmā, the Compiler of the Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Rādhā with His Four heads, bent low and addressed Her thus:

चतुरान्न उवाच

गृहा त्वद्धस्म्पृता प्रभोक्षा रासमप्रडले ।

युवयोर्द्रवल्पा सा मुध्ययोः शुक्रस्वनान् ॥ 115 ॥

कृष्णांगा च त्वरुंच च त्वरू-न्यासूरी प्रिया ।

त्व-मंत्रप्रादूणं कृत्वा करीतु तव पूजनम् ॥ 116 ॥

Brahmā said: “O Rādhle’ Gaṅgā, appeared from Thee and the Lord Śrī Krṣna. Both of you were transformed before into the liquid forms in the Rāsā Maṇḍalam, on hearing the music of Śaṅkara. And That Liquid Form is Gaṅgā. So She is born of Thee and Śrī Krṣna. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as such. She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee.

पंचियाति पतितस्तया वैकुण्डेशश्रुर्भुः ।

भूस्याया: कलया तथा: पतितस्यावतिशिधः ॥ 117 ॥

गोलोकसा च या गृत्रा सर्वसया त्वाणिके ।

तद्विका त्वं देवेशी सर्वदा सा त्वादतमा ॥ 118 ॥

The four armed Lord of Vaikuntha will be Her husband. And when She will appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband, O Mother! The Ganga that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self born daughter."

इदाणी वचनं शुवा सीचकार च समिता ।

विद्वेष्वृ सा कृष्णयादाङ्छनखात्राः ॥ 119 ॥

तत्रैव सकृतां शान्ता तस्यो तेषां च मयतः ।

उवास तोयादुत्थाय तदधिष्ठादुवेतता ॥ 120 ॥

तन्तोयंक्राणाक्रिश्रित्यापितंचकमण्डती ।

क्रिक्रिष्टार शिरस चन्द्रधिकृतशेखरः ॥ 121 ॥

Hearing, thus, the words of Brahma \( ^{1} \) , Rādhā gave Her assent towards the protection of Ganga. And then Ganga appeared from the toe-tip of Śri Krṣna. The liquid Ganga, then, assumed Her own form and, getting up from water, was received with great honour by the Devas. Bhagavān Brahma \( ^{1} \)  took a little of that Ganges water in His Kamandalu and Bhagavān Mahādeva kept some of it in His own head.

गड़पर्य याधिकामन्य प्रददो कमलोद्यः ।

तस्तोजकवचं पूजां विधानं ध्यानमेव च ॥ 122 ॥

सर्वे तत्सामदेवोक्ते पुरुष्यांकमं तथा ।

गड़ा तामेव संपूज्य बैकुंठ प्रययी सह ॥ 123 ॥

The lotus born Brahmā, then, initiated Gāngā into the Rādhā Mantra and gave Her instructions, Rādhā Stotra (hymn of Rādhā) according to the Sāma Veda, Rādhā Kavaca (protection mantras), Rādhā Dhyān (meditation on Rādhā), method of worship of Rādhā, and Rādhā's puracsaraṇa. Gāngā worshipped Rādhā according to these instructions and went to Vaikunṭha.

लक्ष्मी: सस्वती गड़ा तुलसी विध्यावली ।

एता नारायणस्यैव चतरो योचितो मुने ॥124॥

अथ तं सस्मितः कृष्णो बढ़ाणं समुचार सः ।

सर्वकालस्य वृत्तांत दुर्बिधमविर्याश्रता ॥ १ २ ५ ॥

O Muni! Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, Gaṅgā, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four became the wives of Nārāyaṇa. Kṛṣṇa, then, smiled and explained to Brahmā the history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others.

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

गृहाण गड़ां है बहान् है विजणो है महेश्व ।

शृणु कालस्य चृतांतं मन्तो ब्रह्विणगमय ॥ 126 ॥

यूयं च ऐउ-ऐ० देवाश्रु मन्यो मनवस्था ।

सिद्धा यगश्विनश्ठीव ये ऐर्नेय समानता: ॥ 127 ॥

He then spoke: "O Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Maheśvara! Now you better take Gaghā and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by this time. Hear.

Book IX Chapter XIV

You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, Siddhas, and other Mahātmās that are present here, are living now. For this region of Goloka is not affected by Kāla (Time). Now the Kalpa is going to expire.

एते जीवित नोगोकेके कालचक्रविवर्षिते ।

जलगलुते सर्वविश्वं जातं कल्पस्वयोरद्धना ॥ 128 ॥

ब्रहाणाय येन्यविश्वश्यास्ते विलीभानुगा मयि ।

बैकुण्डं च चिता सर्वं जलमनं च पचपत्र ॥ 129 ॥

So in the other regions than Goloka and Vaikunthā, the Brahmās, etc., that were existing in all other Universes, have all now dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and Vaikunthā, all are now under water, the pre-state of earth.

गत्वा सुहिं कुरु पुनर्वह्योगकादिकं भवम् ।

स्वे ब्रह्मां वित्तय पश्यारूषा प्रपास्यति ॥ 130 ॥

एवमन्येषु विशेषु सुही ब्रह्मादिकं पुनः ।

कंरोग्यहं पुनः सुहिं गछ्छ शीर्धं सुरैः सह ॥ 131 ॥

Batter go and create your own Brahmāṇḍas and Ganga will go to that newly created Brahmāṇḍa. I will also create other worlds and the Brahmās thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do your own works respectively.

गतो बहुतरः कालो युधाकं च चतुर्मुखाः ।

गत: कतिविधास्ते च भविष्यन्ति च वैधसः ॥ 132 ॥

इत्युक्चा राधिकानाथो जगामांतःपुरे मुने ।

देवा गत्वा पुन सृष्टि चढ़गेव प्रयन्ततः ॥ 133 ॥

You have waited here for a long interval. As many Brahmās that have fallen all appear again." Thus saying Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of Rādhā went to His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly retired from that spot and engaged themselves earnestly in the creation work.

गोलोके सा स्थिता गुजा वैकुण्ठे शिवलोकतः ।

ब्रहलोके स्थिताएं-यत्र यत्र यत्र पुः: स्थिता ॥ 134 ॥

तत्रैव सा गता गुर्ज्ञा परमात्मानः ।

निर्भात विधुपादाङ्गानेन विधुपदौ सुता ॥ 135 ॥

इत्येवं क्रवितं बहान्नोगोख्यानुप्तामम् ।

सुखदे पोक्षदं सरा किं घ्यः शोतुमिच्छसि ॥ 136 ॥

इति शीमद्वैशीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्ये गंगोपाख्याने

ययोदोयोध्याः: 11 13 11

Gangā remained as before till then in the region of Goloka, Vaikuntha, Śivaloka, Brahma-loka, and in other places, by the command of Śri Kṛṣṇa. She is named Viṣṇupadī, because She appeared from the feet of Viṣṇu. Thus I have described to you this pleasant, essential story of Gāngā, leading to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say.

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter the anecdote of

Gāngā in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by

Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XIV

