[Ch 17 Verse 1-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Maharṣi Bhāradvāja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, King Yudhājit called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent one! What am I to do now? I want to carry away be force this boy with his mother sweet Manoramā; no one desirous of one’s welfare wo’nt trifle away his enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does so, that enemy will get stronger day by day, as the disease consumption becomes stronger; and will ultimately become the cause of death."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Maharṣi Bhāradvāja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, the King Yudhājit called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent one! What am I to do now? I want to carry away by force this boy with his mother sweet Manoramā; no one desirous of one’s welfare won’t trifle away his enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does so, that enemy will get stronger day by day, as the disease consumption becomes stronger; and will ultimately become the cause of death.

[Ch 17 Verse 4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "There is no warrior, nor any soldier here of the other party; no one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of my daughter's son and can kill him."
NEW CORR ENG ──► There is no warrior, nor any soldiers here of the other party; no one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of my daughter’s son and can kill him.

[Ch 17 Verse 5]
OLD OCR ENG ──► "I will try today to carry him away by force, and Sudarśana being killed, my daughter's son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; there is no doubt in this."
NEW CORR ENG ──► I will try to-day to carry him away by force, and Sudarśana being killed, my daughter’s son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; there in no doubt in this.”

[Ch 17 Verse 6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The prime minister said: “No such hazardous courage need be shewn now; you have heard the Maharṣi’s words; he quoted you the example of Viśvāmitra.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The prime minister said :-- No such hazardous courage need be shewn now; you have heard the Maharshi’s words; he quoted you the example of Viśvāmitra.

[Ch 17 Verse 7]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “O King! In days of yore, Viśvāmitra, the son of the King Gādhi, was a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally reached the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! In days of yore, Viśvāmitra, the son of the King Gādhi, was a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally reached the hermitage of Vaśiṣṭha.

[Ch 17 Verse 8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The powerful king Viśvāmitra bowed down before the Muni, and the Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The powerful king Viśvāmitra bowed down before the Muni, and the Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there.

[Ch 17 Verse 9]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the high souled Vasiṣṭha invited the king to a dinner. Viśvāmitra, the king, went there with his whole army.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the high souled Vaśiṣṭha invited the king to a dinner. Viśvāmitra, the king, went there with his whole army.

[Ch 17 Verse 10-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There was a cow, named Nandini, of Vasisṭha. The Muni prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all. The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming to know of the divine power of the cow, asked Vasisṭha to give his cow Nandini over to him and said: "The udder of your cow Nandini is like a big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let me have your cow Nandini."
NEW CORR ENG ──► There was a cow, named Nandinī, of Vaśiṣṭha. The Muni prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all. The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming to know of the divine power of the cow, asked Vaśiṣṭha to give his cow Nandinī over to him and said “The udder of your cow Nandinī is like a big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let me have your cow Nandinī.”

[Ch 17 Verse 13]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasiṣṭha said: “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot give you this cow any way, let your thousand cows be yours.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha said “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot give you this cow in any way, let your thousand cows be yours.”

[Ch 17 Verse 14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Víśvāmitra said: “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your cow; in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Viśvāmitra said :-- “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your cow; in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.”

[Ch 17 Verse 15]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vasittha said: “O King! As you like, better take it perforce; I will never be able to give you my cow Nandini from my house.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vaśiṣṭha said :-- “O King! As you like, better take it perforce; I will never be able to give you my cow Nandinī from my house.”

[Ch 17 Verse 16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus Vasistha's words, Viśvāmitra, the king, ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandinī away by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Hearing thus the Vaśiṣṭha’s words, Viśvāmitra, the King, ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandinī away by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force.

[Ch 17 Verse 17-19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with ropes and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandini, trembling and with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O One! whose wealth consists only in asceticism! Are you going to leave me? Otherwise why these fellows are binding me with a cord and dragging me away?” At this the Muni replied: “O Nandini! I have never parted with you; I perform all my sacrifices through your milk. O auspicious one! I honoured this king, my guests, with eatables prepared from your food; and for that reason he is carrying you away from me by sheer force. What can I do? O Nandini! I have not the least desire to part with you.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with ropes and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandinī, trembling and with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O One! whose wealth consists only in asceticism! Are you going to leave me? Otherwise why these fellows are binding me with a cord and dragging me away?” At this the Muni replied “O Nandinī! I have never parted with you; I perform all my sacrifices through your milk. O auspicious one! I honoured this king, my guests, with eatables prepared from your food and for that reason he is carrying you away from me by sheer force. What can I do? O Nandinī! I have not the least desire to part with you.”

[Ch 17 Verse 20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry and bellowed terribly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry and bellowed loudly and terribly.

[Ch 17 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and they uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and they uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.”

[Ch 17 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful.

[Ch 17 Verse 23]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the Ksattriya Śakti; and thinking the Brāhmanic power would be attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and penance.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the Kṣattriya Śakti; and thinking the Brāhmanic power would be attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and penance.

[Ch 17 Verse 24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Performing penance and tapasyā, very hard indeed, in the great forest, Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, succeeded at last in becoming a Rṣi and then he renounced his Kṣaṭtriya Dharma.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Performing penance and tapasyā, very hard indeed, in the great forest, Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, succeeded at last in becoming a Ṛṣi and then he renounced his Kṣattriya Dharma.

[Ch 17 Verse 25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics and be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the extinction of the race."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics and be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the extinction of the race.

[Ch 17 Verse 26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► “Better dost appease the Muni and now go back to your own kingdom. Let Sudarśana remain here at his pleasure.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Better dost thou appease the Muni and now go back to your own kingdom. Let Sudarśana remain here at his pleasure.

[Ch 17 Verse 27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to you? It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak minor boy.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to you? It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak minor boy.

[Ch 17 Verse 28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one's jealousy? What is inevitable will surely come to pass."
NEW CORR ENG ──► This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one’s jealousy? What is inevitable will surely come to pass.

[Ch 17 Verse 29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; and a blade of grass acts sometimes like a thunderbolt.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; a blade

[Ch 17 Verse 30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! You are very intelligent; consider that by, combinations of circumstances, a hare can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my beneficent advice.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O king! You are very intelligent; consider that by, combinations of circumstances, a hair can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my beneficent advice.

[Ch 17 Verse 31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Vyāsa said: O king! The best of kings, Yudhājit hearing the prime minister's advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni and returned to his own city.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Vyāsa said :-- O king! The best of kings, Yudhājit hearing the prime minister’s advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni and returned to his own city.

[Ch 17 Verse 32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Manoramā, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining peaceful in the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, engaged in vows?
NEW CORR ENG ──► Manoramā, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining peaceful in the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, engaged in vows.

[Ch 17 Verse 33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis, all together, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis, altogether, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious.

[Ch 17 Verse 34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the Munis seeing him began, in the presence of Sudarśana, to address him Kliḥ, "Kliḥ."
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the Munis seeing him began, in the presence of Sudarśana, to address him “Klib,” “Klib.”

[Ch 17 Verse 35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sudarśana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up the one letter “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact, the prince of the root mantras of Kāma, with anusvāra omitted.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Sudarśana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up the one letter, “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact the prince of the root mantras of Kāma, with anusvāra omitted.

[Ch 17 Verse 36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated this in his mind.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated this in his mind.

[Ch 17 Verse 37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! Thus that boy Sudarśana was initiated in this root mantra of Kāma (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Saṃskāra (innate tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! Thus that boy Sudarśana was initiated in this root mantra of Kāma (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Samskāra (innate tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate.

[Ch 17 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most excellent mantra, though without its Rsi (seer), meditation, without its chanda (metre) and without Nyāsa (assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the quintessence of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind spontaneously and never forgot it.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most excellent mantra, though without its Ṛṣi (seer), meditation, without its chanda (metre) and without Nyāsa (assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the quintessence of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind spontaneously and never forgot it.

[Ch 17 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the king's son grew eleven years old, the Muni performed his Apunayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him begin the study of the Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon mastered all the studies about archery, all the moral and political sciences in conformity with proper rules, within a very short time.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the king’s son grew eleven years old, the Muni performed his Upanayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him begin the study of the Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon mastered all the studies about archery, all the moral and political sciences in conformity with proper rules, within a very short time.

[Ch 17 Verse 42-44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, expert in many branches of learning, Sudarśana served his Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the Ganges.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, expert in many branches of learning, Sudarśana served his Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the Ganges.

[Ch 17 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened arrows, quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened arrows, quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest.

[Ch 17 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely princess Śaśikalā, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the daughter of the King of Kāśī, came to hear that a beautiful prince named Sudarśana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and endowed with all auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely princess Śaśikalā, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the daughter of the king of Kāshi, came to hear that a beautiful prince named Sudarśana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and endowed with all auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest.

[Ch 17 Verse 48]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband.

[Ch 17 Verse 49-50]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and said: "O fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudarśana is my devotee; he will fulfill, at my word, all your desires."
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and said “O fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudarśana is my devotee; he will fulfill, at my word, all your desires.”

[Ch 17 Verse 51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams and hearing Her sweet words, the honoured Śaśikalā was drowned in an ocean of bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams and hearing Her sweet words, the honoured Śaśikalā was drowned in the ocean of bliss.

[Ch 17 Verse 52]
OLD OCR ENG ──► gladness, her mother perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have been internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but Saśikalā was too much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her satisfaction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► gladness, her mother perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have been internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but Śaśikalā was too much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her satisfaction.

[Ch 17 Verse 53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh repeatedly on account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in detail all about her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh repeatedly on account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in detail all about her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions.

[Ch 17 Verse 54]
OLD OCR ENG ──► On one occasion, that large eyed Śaśikaālā went out for enjoyment to a nice garden beautified with campaka flowers, attended by her companion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► On one occasion, that large eyed Śaśikalā went out for enjoyment to a nice garden beautified with champaka flowers, attended by her companion.

[Ch 17 Verse 55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► While the King's daughter seated under a campaka tree, was collecting flowers, she saw a Brāhmin, coming towards her in great haste.
NEW CORR ENG ──► While the King’s daughter seated under a champaka tree, was collecting flowers, she saw a Brāhmin, coming towards her in great haste.

[Ch 17 Verse 56]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed with all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O blessed one! whence are you coming?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed with all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O blessed one! whence are you coming?”

[Ch 17 Verse 57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇa said: “O girl! I am coming on an errand from the hermitage of Bharadvāja Muni. Please mention what you are going to ask me?”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇa said :-- “O girl! I am coming on an errand from the hermitage of Bhāradvāja Muni. Please mention what you are going to ask me?”

[Ch 17 Verse 58]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Sāsikālā replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is there in that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śaśikalā replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is therein that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.”

[Ch 17 Verse 59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇa said “O fair one! There is staying the most lovely Sudarśana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest of all men.”
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmaṇa said “O fair one! There is staying the most lovely Sudarśana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest of all men.

[Ch 17 Verse 60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given to him in vain."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given to him in vain.

[Ch 17 Verse 61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to seeing how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities."
NEW CORR ENG ──► O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to see how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities.

[Ch 17 Verse 62-177]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that, that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator has, no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a happy union of two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel). Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the story of Visvāmitra and on the getting of the root mantra of Kāma by the son of the King in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that, that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator has, no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a happy union of two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel).” Thus ends the seventeenth chapter on the story of Viśvāmitra and on the getting of the root mantra of Kāma by the son of the King in Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
