CHAPTER XVII

On the Story of Visvāmitra

व्यास उवाच

इत्याकर्पयं वचस्तस्य मुनेस्त्रावरीपिति: ।

मन्त्रिवदूं समाहूय पपछ्छ तमतन्टितः ॥ १ ॥

किं कर्तव्यं सुबुद्धोउ प्रयाउघ चतु सुवत ।

बतावयायित तां कामं सपुत्रां च सुभाषिषिणी ॥ 2 ॥

रिपुरल्पोर्षि नोगेश्यः सर्वथा शुभमिच्छता ।

राजयक्षेयं संवृद्धो भूत्वये परिकल्पयेत् ॥ 3 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of the Maharṣi Bhāradvāja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, King Yudhājit called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent one! What am I to do now? I want to carry away be force this boy with his mother sweet Manoramā; no one desirous of one’s welfare wo’nt trifle away

Book III Chapter XVII

his enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does so, that enemy will get stronger day by day, as the disease consumption becomes stronger; and will ultimately become the cause of death."

नात्र सैन्यं न योद्वासिति यो भामात्र निवारयेत् ।

गृहीता हमिन तं तत्र दौहित्रस्य रिपुं किल ॥ 4 ॥

"There is no warrior, nor any soldier here of the other party; no one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of my daughter's son and can kill him."

निर्फंटकं भवेग्रज्यं वतामध्ये बलादम् ।

हते सुदर्भे नूनं निर्भयोजेसी भवेदिति ॥ 5 ॥

"I will try today to carry him away by force, and Sudarśana being killed, my daughter's son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; there is no doubt in this."

प्रधान ज्ञाच

नाहसं न हि कतैंव्छं शुतं राजनमेवंचः ।

विश्वामित्य दृष्टान: कवितन्तेने मारिष ॥ 6 ॥

The prime minister said: “No such hazardous courage need be shewn now; you have heard the Maharṣi’s words; he quoted you the example of Viśvāmitra.”

पुरा गाधिसुतः श्रीमात्विशामैज्ञोरितिशिश्रतः ।

विश्रचन नृपश्रेष्ठो वसिष्ठाश्रममप्यगत् ॥ 7 ॥

“O King! In days of yore, Viśvāmitra, the son of the King Gādhi, was a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally reached the hermitage of Vasiṣṭha.

समस्कूल च रं राजा विश्वामिजः प्रतपायान् ।

उपविष्ठो नृपश्रेष्ठो पुतिना दत्तविष्टः ॥ 8 ॥

The powerful king Viśvāmitra bowed down before the Muni, and the Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there.

निर्मित्रोत वसिष्ठेन भोजनाय महात्मना ।

सरीव्यछ श्वितो राजा गाधिपुजो महायशा: ॥ 9 ॥

Then the high souled Vasiṣṭha invited the king to a dinner. Viśvāmitra, the king, went there with his whole army.

नन्दिग्याउसातीदतं सर्व भव्यभोज्यादिकं च यत् ।

भुक्सा राजा ससैन्यश वार्डितं तत भोजनम् ॥ 10 ॥

प्रतापं तं च नन्दिन्या: परित्य स पार्थिवः ।

ययाचे नन्दिनीं राजा वासिषं मुनिसतमम् ॥ १ १ ॥

विश्वाधित्र उवाच

मुने वैधुसहं ते घटोर्नीनां ददाम्यमू ।

नन्दिनीं देहि मे वेनुं प्रार्थयामि परन्तवः ॥ १ २ ॥

There was a cow, named Nandini, of Vasisṭha. The Muni prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all. The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming to know of the divine power of the cow, asked Vasisṭha to give his cow Nandini over to him and said: "The udder of your cow Nandini is like a big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let me have your cow Nandini."

वसिष्ठ उवाच

होमधेनुरित्यं राजत्र ददायी कक्षंचन ।

सहसं चापि धेनुर्नां तदैवं तत सितुं ॥ 13 ॥

Vasiṣṭha said: “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot give you this cow any way, let your thousand cows be yours.”

विश्वास उवाच

अयुतं वाउव लक्षं वा दादामि मनसेसितम् ।

देहि मे निन्दीं साधो ग्रहीवामि कराल्वा ॥ 14 ॥

Víśvāmitra said: “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your cow; in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.”

वसिष्ठ उवाच

कामं गृहाण नृपते बलाद्व यथाक्चि ।

नाहं द्वादीय ते राजनस्येब्थया नास्तिनों गृहान् ॥ 15 ॥

Vasittha said: “O King! As you like, better take it perforce; I will never be able to give you my cow Nandini from my house.”

तच्छूला नुपतिभूत्यानादिद्वेग महावलान ।

नयधे नर्तिनी धేनेु बलदधिसुसंस्थिता: ॥ १ ६ ॥

O King! Hearing thus Vasistha's words,

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

Viśvāmitra, the king, ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandinī away by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force.

ते भूत्वा जगुहुतां तु हुतदाक्रम्य यनितान् ।

वेयमाना मुनि प्रह सुराभि: साशुलोचना ॥ 17 ॥

मुने त्वजसि मां कस्मात्कर्षयन्ति सुवन्तिनाम् ।

मुनसितां प्रत्युबाचेदं त्वजे नाहं सुदुर्धधदे ॥ 18 ॥

बलाययति राजास्ती पृजितोउघ मया शुषे ।

कि करीमि न चेच्छामि तसृष्टां तांना मसा किल ॥ 19 ॥

The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with ropes and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandini, trembling and with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O One! whose wealth consists only in asceticism! Are you going to leave me? Otherwise why these fellows are binding me with a cord and dragging me away?” At this the Muni replied: “O Nandini! I have never parted with you; I perform all my sacrifices through your milk. O auspicious one! I honoured this king, my guests, with eatables prepared from your food; and for that reason he is carrying you away from me by sheer force. What can I do? O Nandini! I have not the least desire to part with you.

इतुल्ता मुनिना धेयुः कोधयुक्ता बघ्यूव है ।

हंभारवं चकाराणु कृणशबं सुदाडणणु ॥ 20 ॥

Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry and bellowed terribly.

उद्यगातस्मया देहानु दैत्य योरतगरसता ।

सायुधासिति तिक्षिति बृदतेः कवचाबृताः ॥ 21 ॥

At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and they uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.”

सैन्यं सर्व हर्त तैस्तु नन्दिति प्रतिमोचिता ।

गृकाकी निर्भौतो राजा विश्वामिकोरितुःवित्तः ॥ 22 ॥

They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful.

हर्ते घापोस्तिवानामा निदन्धासावलं महत ।

बाबांं बलं दुराराध्ये मत्वा स तपसि स्थितः ॥ 23 ॥

Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the Ksattriya Śakti; and thinking the Brāhmanic power would be attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and penance.

तत्वा बहुति वर्षिणि तयो घोरं महावने ।

ऋषित्वं प्राण गाधोयस्वक्त्वा क्षात्रं विधिं पुनः ॥ २४ ॥

Performing penance and tapasyā, very hard indeed, in the great forest, Viśvāmitra, the son of Gādhi, succeeded at last in becoming a Rṣi and then he renounced his Kṣaṭtriya Dharma.

तस्मात्मार्थि राजेन्द्र मा कृष्ण वैरमद्धुतम् ।

कुलनागरकं नूनं तापसैः सह संयुगम् ॥ 25 ॥

Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics and be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the extinction of the race."

मुनिवर्ष जजाङ त्वं समाश्रय तपोतिधिम् ।

सुदर्जनोन्पि योजनैर तिहत्वच यथासुखम् ॥ 26 ॥

“Better dost appease the Muni and now go back to your own kingdom. Let Sudarśana remain here at his pleasure.”

बालोर्धयं निधिनः किं ते कार्थिति नृणाहितम् ।

वृथा ते वैरभावोउमनाथे दुबलें शिर्णी ॥ 27 ॥

O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to you? It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak minor boy.

दया सर्वेक कर्तेबा दैवधानीमदं जन्त ।

ईर्थ्यां कि नृपश्रेष्ठ पट्ट्यांल तद्धाविधि ॥ 28 ॥

This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one's jealousy? What is inevitable will surely come to pass."

वड़ं तृणायते राज-दिव्योरागर संशयः ।

तृणं वझायते क्वापि समये देवयोगतः ॥ 29 ॥

O King! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; and a blade of grass acts sometimes like a thunderbolt.

शगरको हृति शार्तून माफको वे तथा गजम् ।

साहसं मुकु घेधाविन कुभे मे वचनं हितम् ॥ 30 ॥

O King! You are very intelligent; consider that

Book III Chapter XVII

by, combinations of circumstances, a hare can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my beneficent advice.

व्यास उवाच

तच्छुला वचनं तस्य युधाजिपुसपतम्: ।

प्राण्य तं भुनी भून्तीं जगाम स्वपुरं वृपः ॥ 31 ॥

Vyāsa said: O king! The best of kings, Yudhājit hearing the prime minister's advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni and returned to his own city.

मनोरापसि स्वस्थापूदाश्रमे तत्र संशिता ।

पालयामास पुत्रं तं सुवर्णेन्मृतजतम् ॥ ३ २ ॥

Manoramā, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining peaceful in the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, engaged in vows?

दिते देने कुमारोउसी जगामोपेचरं ततः ।

सुगिवालगतः क्रीडाशिभयः सर्वतः सृषः ॥ 33 ॥

The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis, all together, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious.

एकस्मिनस्यमयं तन विदल्लं समुपागतम् ।

क्लीविते पुनिगुस्तमामंयत्तदितिके ॥ 34 ॥

One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the Munis seeing him began, in the presence of Sudarśana, to address him Kliḥ, "Kliḥ."

सुर्गनस्तु तच्छुत्वा द्यातैकाक्षरं सुकृटम् ।

अनुसावायुतं तच्च प्रोवाचापि पुनः पुनः ॥ 35 ॥

Sudarśana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up the one letter “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact, the prince of the root mantras of Kāma, with anusvāra omitted.

खीजे वे कामराजाख्यं गृहीतं मनसा तदा ।

जजाप बालको3त्यर्थे धृत्वा चेपसि सादम् ॥ 36 ॥

Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated this in his mind.

भावियोगाम्याराज कामाराजाख्यमद्धुम् ।

स्वभावेनैव तेनैत्थं यृहीतं बालकेन वै ॥ 37 ॥

O King! Thus that boy Sudarśana was initiated in this root mantra of Kāma (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Saṃskāra (innate tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate.

तदारभी पडमे वर्षे प्राय मन्यमनुत्तमम् ।

त्रशिष्ड्छेदोक्षिति च ध्यान्यासविवर्षितम् ॥ 38 ॥

प्रजयम्नसा नियं क्रीडालयि स्वायित्यि ।

विसस्मान तं नमं ज्ञाला सारमिति स्वयम् ॥ 39 ॥

The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most excellent mantra, though without its Rsi (seer), meditation, without its chanda (metre) and without Nyāsa (assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the quintessence of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind spontaneously and never forgot it.

वर्षे चैकाव्यो प्राप्ते कुमारोज्ञी सृगवाक्यः ।

मुनिना चोपनीतोप्र येवदम्यापितस्तथा ॥ 40 ॥

धनुर्वैदं तथा संगं नितीगास्त्रं विधानत ।

अभ्यस्ताः सकला विद्यास्तेन मन्वकलादिति ॥ 41 ॥

When the king's son grew eleven years old, the Muni performed his Apunayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him begin the study of the Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon mastered all the studies about archery, all the moral and political sciences in conformity with proper rules, within a very short time.

कदाचित्योति प्रयक्षे देवीकर्ण ददारुं है ।

रक्ताबरं रक्तबर्ग रक्तस्वविभिषुभुम् ॥ 42 ॥

गरड़े वाहने संस्थां वैधवारी शक्तिमद्धुताम् ।

दूद्धा प्रसन्ददन: स बयूद नृपातक्नः ॥ 43 ॥

One day Sudārsana got a vision of the Supreme Goddess, of a red colour, wearing red apparel and decorated with red ornaments, mounting on Garuda and with Her wonderful Vaisnavi powers and Her face, fully opened like the budding of a lotus flower. वने तम्मीस्थितः सोउ शवविद्वार्यतचलित् ।

मातरं सेवामानसु विज्ञाहर नदीतेरे ॥ 44 ॥

Thus, expert in many branches of learning,

Sudarśana served his Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the Ganges.

गतसनं च सम्पातं विशिषाङ्ठा शिलाशिताः ।

नृपीतकवचं तस्मै दर्तं चाचिक्वया वने ॥ 45 ॥

One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened arrows, quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest.

तृतस्मिन्समये पुत्री काशिराजस्य सुप्रिया ।

नाना शशिकाल दिव्या सर्वलक्षणासंपुता ॥ 46 ॥

शुभात नृपपुरं तं वत्नर्थ च सूद्रानंम् ।

सर्वलक्षणसम्पर्न शूरं काममिवायपम् ॥ 47 ॥

O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely princess Śaśikalā, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the daughter of the King of Kāśī, came to hear that a beautiful prince named Sudarśana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and endowed with all auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest.

वर्दीवान्युवाच्छुवा राजपुरं सुर्मंतम् ।

चकमे मनसा ते वै वंर वरवितुं छिया ॥ 48 ॥

The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband.

स्वपे तस्या: सामाग्य जगद्यका निशान्ते ।

उवाच वचनं चेदं समाधास्य सुसंस्थिता ॥ 49 ॥

वं वर यमुश्रीण मम भकः सुदर्जनः ।

सर्वकामप्रदलरेस्तु वचनात्मय भाधिमी ॥ 50 ॥

Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and said: "O fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudarśana is my devotee; he will fulfill, at my word, all your desires."

एवं शशिकला दूद्वा स्वपे रूपं मनोहरम् ।

अंबाया वचनं सूत्वा जहर्षं घृष्णाभिमिति ॥ 51 ॥

Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams and hearing Her sweet words, the honoured Śaśikalā was drowned in an ocean of bliss.

उपस्थिता सा मुटा युक्ता पृष्टा मात्रा पुनः पुनः ।

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रपान्यित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रपान्यित्ति ॥ 52 ॥.

प्रमोदे कारणं बाला नोवाचातित्रप्रापित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

प्रमोदे कारणं बालா नोवाचातित्रापित्ति ॥ 52 ॥

gladness, her mother perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have been internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but Saśikalā was too much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her satisfaction.

जहास मुदामपाता स्मृत्वा स्वन्दे मुहुर्मुहुः ।

सखी प्राह तदात-यां वे स्वलवृत्तं सविस्तम् ॥ 53 ॥

The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh repeatedly on account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in detail all about her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions.

कदाचित्सा शिकाराधेयवापोयचनं सुभम् ।

सखीयुक्ता शिवगालाही चमकैकरूपशीभत्न ॥ 54 ॥

On one occasion, that large eyed Śaśikaālā went out for enjoyment to a nice garden beautified with campaka flowers, attended by her companion.

पुष्याणि चित्त्वती बाला चमकाशःचित्ताउबल ।

अपयद्वाहाणों मार्गे आगछन्त नत्वारित्यम् ॥ 55 ॥

While the King's daughter seated under a campaka tree, was collecting flowers, she saw a Brāhmin, coming towards her in great haste.

तं प्रणाय द्विजं श्यामा बभावे मयूरं चचः ।

कृतो देशान्याभाग कृतभागमं त्वया ॥ 56 ॥

After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed with all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O blessed one! whence are you coming?”

द्विज उवाच

भारत्जाबभ्यालैने नूनभागमं मम ।

जातं वै कार्यवीरोन किं पृष्ठसि वद्वय मे ॥ 57 ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said: “O girl! I am coming on an errand from the hermitage of Bharadvāja Muni. Please mention what you are going to ask me?”

शशिकलोबाच

तत्राक्षेम महाभाग वर्षनीयं किमिति वे ।

लोकातिलं शिशेषेण प्रेक्षणीयतमे किल ॥ ५८ ॥

Sāsikālā replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is there in that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.”

Book III Chapter XVIII

बाहाण उवाच

धूवसन्धिसुतः श्रीमानासे सूद्रिंगना नृपः ।

यथार्थनाम सुशोणि वर्तेने पुरुभोपनाः ॥ ५९ ॥

The Brāhmaṇa said “O fair one! There is staying the most lovely Sudarśana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest of all men.”

तस्य तोचनमावन्तं निष्क्रत प्रतिभाति च ।

येन रुहो न चामोक कुमारस्तु सुदर्शनः ॥ 6 ० ॥

O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given to him in vain."

एकत्र निहिता धारा गृणाः सर्वे सिसुक्षुणा ।

गुणानामाकरं उहुं मन्ये तेनैव कौतुकात् ॥ 6 1 ॥

O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to seeing how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities."

तब योग्यः कुमारो5सी भर्तां भवितुम्हैति ।

योगो5यं विहितोयासी-मिणाकांचनयोरिति ॥ 6 2 ॥

इति श्रीमदैवीभागवते महापुराणों तृतीयरकन्चे

सप्तद्यो5ध्याः ॥ 17 7 ॥

O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that, that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator has, no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a happy union of two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel).

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the story of Visvāmitra and on the getting of the root mantra of Kāma by the son of the King in Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharṣī Veda Vyāsa.

Book III Chapter XVIII

