CHAPTER XVI

On the Incarnation of Mahā Lakṣmī in the House of Kuśadhvaja

श्रीनारायण खाच

लक्ष्मी ती च समाराध्य चोयोग तपसा मुने ।

वरामिछं च प्रत्येकं संप्रापततृषीवित्मत् ॥ १ ॥

महालक्ष्मीवंशेणैव ती पृव्यशीणे क्षयवृतः ।

पुण्यवंती पुर्वतौ धार्येजकुशण्यजै ॥ २ ॥

₹rī Nārāyaṇa said: O Munī! Dharmadhvaja and Kuśadhvaja practised severe tapasyā and worshipped Lakṣmī. They then got separately their desired boons. By the boon of Mahā Lakṣmī, they became again the rulers of the earth.

कुणाधजस्य पनी च देवी मालावती सती ।

सा सुषाव च कालेन कमलांगां सुती सतीग् ॥ 3 ॥

सा च भूथिकालेन ज्ञानयुक्ता बघ्रव ह ।

कृत्वा वेव्यविं सयघुन्तखौ सृतिकागृहात् ॥ 4 ॥

वेद्यविंस स चकार जातमाधेग कन्यका ।

They acquired great religious merits and they also had their children. The wife of Kuśadhavaja was named Mālāvatī. After a long time, the chaste wife delivered one daughter, born of the parts of Kamalā. The daughter, on being born, became full of wisdom.

तस्मातां च वेद्वर्ती प्रवदिति मनिधिणं: ॥ 5 ॥

जातामत्रोग सुन्नता जगाम तपसे वनम् ।

सर्वेर्निपिद्धा यलेन नात्याणपरायणा ॥ 6 ॥

On being born, the baby began to sing clearly the Vedic mantrams from the lying-chamber. Therefore, and She was named Vedavati by the Pandits. She bathed after her birth and became ready to go to the forest to practise severe tapas. Everyone, then, tried earnestly to dissuade her,

devoted to Nārāyaṇa, from this enterprise. But she did not listen to anybody.

एकमन्यंतरं चैव पुरुकरं च तप्तविनी ।

अन्युग्रां च तप्तयां च लीलगा हि चकार सा ॥ 7 ॥

तथापि पुहा न किल्हा नवयोवनसंयुता ।

शुश्राव सा च सहसा सुवाचम्यगरीरिणीम् ॥ 8 ॥

जम्भाते च ते भर्ती भविष्यति हरि: स्वयम् ।

ब्रहादिष्यिनुरायंध पति लप्यसि सुंदीर ॥ 9 ॥

She went to Puşkara and practised hard tapasyā for one Manvantara. Yet her body did not get lean a bit; rather she grew more plumphy and fatter. By degrees her youth began to shew signs in her body; one day she heard an incorporeal voice from the air above, 'O Fair One! In your next birth Śri Hari, adored by Brahmā and other gods, will be your husband.'

इति श्रुत्वा च सा इहा चकार हु पुनस्तपः ।

अतीव निर्जनस्थाने यदते गंधामदने ॥ १ ० ॥

तत्रेव सुचिरं तत्वा विश्वस्य समूवास सा ।

ददर्षं पुतस्तज रावणं दुनिवारणम् ॥ १ १ ॥

ग्रहुा सात्रिविष्यक्ना च पाणं तमै ददी किका ।

सुस्वादुपूर्ति च फलं जलं चाधिपुशीरतम् ॥ 12 ॥

तन्द्र भुक्नवा स पाधिष्ठशोबास तत्समीपत: ।

Hearing this, her joy knew no bounds. She went to the solitary caves in the Gandhamādana mountain to practise tapas again. When a long time passed away in this tapasyā, one day the irresistible Rāvaṇa came there as guest. No sooner Vedavati saw the guest, than the gave him, out of devotion to the guest, water to wash his feet, delicious fruits,

Šrimuddevībhāgavatam

and cool water for his drink. The villain accepted the hospitality and sitting there, began to ask:

चकार प्रणमिति तां का तां केल्याणि वर्तेसे ॥ 13 ॥

तां दृष्टा स वरारोहां पीनओषीपयोधारम।

गरल्योत्सावस्यां च सस्मितां सुदतीं सतीम् ॥ 14 ॥

मृच्छीमवाप कुपणं: कामवाणप्रपीक्षितः ।

स केण समाकृष्य श्रुगारं कर्तुमुचतः ॥ 15 ॥

“O Auspicious One! Who are you?” Seeing the fair smiling lady, with beautiful teeth, her face blooming like the autumnal lotus, of heavy loins, and of full breast, that villain became passionate. He lost entirely all consciousness and became ready to make violence on Her.

सती चुकोप द्वृता ते सत्थितं च चकार ह ।

स जड़ी हस्तपादेशु किंचिद्रुर्फे न च क्षमः ॥ 16 ॥

तुहाव मनसा देवीं प्रययी पयलोचनात् ।

सा तुहा तस्य तत्वानं सुकृतं च चकार ह ॥ 17 ॥

Seeing this, the chaste Vedavati, became angry and out of her tapas influence, astounded him and made him insensible to move. He remained motionless like an inanimate body. He could not move his hands nor feet nor could he speak. That wicked fellow then mentally praises to her. And the praise of the Higher Śakti can never go futile. She became pleased and granted him religious merits in the next world. But she also pronounced this curse:

सा शणाप मद्यं त्वं विनंश्यसि सबोध्वः ।

स्पष्टाई च तव्या कामाछले चाययलोकया ॥ 18 ॥

इत्युक्चना सा च योगेन देहल्यागं चकार ह ।

गंरायां तां च संन्यस्य स्वगृहं रावणो ययो ॥ 19 ॥

‘That when you have touched my body out of passion, then you will be ruined with your whole family for my sake.’ Now see my power. O Nārada! Thus saying to Rāvaṇa, Vedavati left her body by her yogic power.

Then Rāvaṇa took her body and delivered it to the Ganges and he then returned to his own home. Rut Rāvaṇa thought over the matter repeatedly and exclaimed.

अहो किम्बुद्रतं दृष्टं किं कृतं वान्यासं धुना ।

इति संचित्य संचित्य विल्लण पुनः पुनः ॥ 20 ॥

सा च कालोतरं साध्यी बथूव जनकात्मजा ।

सीतादेवीति विश्याता यवर्थे यावणहो है ॥ 21 ॥

‘What wonder have I seen! Oh! What a miracle this lady has wrought! Rāvaṇa thus lamented, This Vedavatī, of pure character, took her birth afterwards as Sitā, the daughter of Janaka. For the sake of this Sitā, Rāvaṇa was ruined with his whole family.

महातपविद्वनी सा च तपसा पूर्वेजन्मतः ।

लेभे रामं च भर्तरं परिपूर्णतम् हरिम् ॥ 22 ॥

संग्राप तपसात्धம் तुरागार्यं जान्यतिम् ।

सा रामा सुविरं जेसे योगण सह सुन्दरी ॥ 23 ॥

By the religious merits of her previous birth, the ascetic lady got Bhagavān Hari Śrī Rāma Candra, the Fulest of the Full, for her husband and remained for a long time in great enjoyment with the Lord fo the world; a thing very difficult to be attained!

जातिसमरा न समरित तपसघ कतनं पुरा ।

सुखेन तनजही सर्वे दुःखं चापि सुखं फले ॥ 24 ॥

Though she was a Jātisamarā (one who knows all about her past lives), she did not feel any pain due to her practising severe austerities in her previous birth; for when the pains end in success, the pains are not then felt at all.

नानाप्रकारविषयं चकार सुचिरं सती ।

संग्राय सुकुमारं तमतीव नव्योवाना ॥ 25 ॥

गृधिनं रसिके श्राँत कांतं देवमनुतमम् ।

स्लीणां मानोजं कृदितं तथा लेये यथैवितम् ॥ 26 ॥

चितुः सत्यपालनार्थ सत्यसंधोर्यूढ़ः ।

जगाम कानन्तं पशुत्कालेन च कवतीसया ॥ 27 ॥

Sitā, in Her fresh youth enjoyed various pleasures in the company of her husband, handsome, peaceful, humorous and witty, the chief of the Devas, loved by the female sex, well-qualified, and just what she desired. But the all-powerful Time is irresistible; the truthful Rāmacandra, the scion of the Raghu's family, had

Book IX Chapter XVI

to keep up the promise made by his father and so he had to go to the forest, ordained by Time.

तस्थी समुद्रिनके्ते सीताया लक्षणे च ।

दर्दर्ग तत्र बहिंच च विग्रकपरंरु हरि: ॥ 28 ॥

रामं च दुःस्तितं सूद्या स च दुःस्ती कम्प्यह ।

उवाच किंचित्सल्येहं सत्यं सत्यपरायण: ॥ 29 ॥

He remained with Sītā and Laksmaṇa near the sea. Once the God Fire appeared to Him in the form of a Brāhmaṇa. Fire, in a Brāhmin-form, saw Rāma Candra morose and became himself mortified. Then the Truthful Fire addressed the truthful Rāmacandra:

द्वित्र जयाच

भगवज्युतां राम कालोउयं यदुपस्थितः ।

सीताहरणकालोउयं तवैव समुपस्थितः ॥ 30 ॥

“O Bhagavān Rāmcandra! I now speak to you how time is now coming to you. No has come the time when your Sītā, will be stolen.”

दैवं वुर्दिवायं च न च दैवात्यो बली ।

जगतसूर्मं मयि न्यस्य छायां रक्षितिकंधुना ॥ ३ १ ॥

दायायमि सीतां तुभ्यं च परीक्षासमये पुनः ।

देवे: प्रस्थापितोड़ं च न च विधो हुताशन: ॥ ३ २ ॥

The course of Destiny is irrestible; none else is more powerful than Time, Fate. So give over your Sitā, the World Mother to me and keep with you this Chāyā Sitā (the shadow Sitā; the false Sitā). When the time of Sitā's ordeal by fire will take place; I will give Her back to you. The Devas united have sent me to you. I am not really a Brāhmin; but I am Agni Deva (eater of oblations).

तमसहब्रवंनं शुचा न प्रकाश्य च लक्ष्मणम् ।

स्वीकारं वचसध्रके हृदयेन विद्युता ॥ 33 ॥

वहिंयोगेन सीताया मायासीतां चकार ह ।

ततुल्यगुणसर्वांगां ददौ रायाय नारत ॥ 34 ॥

Rāmacandra heard Fire and gave his assent. But his heart shattered. He did not speak of this to Lakṣmana. By the yogic power Agni (Fire) created a Māyā Sītā. This Māyā Sītā, O Nārada, was perfectly equal to the real Sītā. Fire, then, handed this Māyā Sītā to the hands of Rāmcandra.

सीतां गृहीत्वा से ययौ गोभयं वतुं निषिध्य च ।

लक्ष्मणो नैव बुबुधे गोयामन्यस्य का कथा ॥ 35 ॥

एतमिश्रतंरो रायो ददर्गं कानकं गृणम् ।

सीता तं प्रेर्यामास तद्यें यत्पपूर्वकम् ॥ 36 ॥

Hutāšana (fire) took the real Sitā and said ‘Never divulge this to any other body’ and went away. What to speak of divulging the secret to any other body, Lakṣmaṇa even could not know it. By this time Rāma saw one deer, made of all gold. To bring that deer carefully to her, Sitā sent Rāmacandra with great eagerness.

संन्यस्य लक्ष्मणं रामो जानक्या रक्षणो बने ।

स्वयं जागम तृष्णं ति तविष्ण ध सायकेन च ॥ 37 ॥

लक्ष्मणेति च शब्दं स कृत्वा च मायया मृगः ।

प्राणांस्तत्याज सहसा पुरो दृष्टा हीरं स्मरन् ॥ 38 ॥

Putting Sitā under Lakṣmaṇa's care, in that forest, Rāma went himself immediately and pierced the deer by one arrow. That Māyā mrga (the deer created by magic powers) on being pierced, cried out 'Hā Lakṣmaṇa! and seeing Hari before him and remembering the name of Hari, quitted his life.

भूगदेहं परित्यज्य दिव्यस्यं विधाय च ।

रत्निमितियानेव वैकुंठे स जगाम ह ।। ३ ९ ।।

वैकुपठलोकद्वार्यसीरिककोरो द्वारपालयोः ।

पुनर्जगाम तद्धुरामादेशाद्धुरायलयोः ।। ४ ० ।।

The deer body then vanished; and a divine body made its appearance in its stead. This new body mounting on an aerial car made of jewels, ascended to Vaikuntha. That Maÿik (magic) deer was in its previous birth, a servant of the two gate-keepers of Vaikuntha; but, for the sake of some emergency, he had to take up this Râksasa birth.

अथ शब्चे च सा शुवा लक्ष्मणेपि च विकल्यम् ।

तं हि सा प्रेयामास लक्ष्मणं रामसर्पिधी ॥ 41 ॥

गते च लक्ष्मणे गेरा यावणो दुनिवारणः ।

सीती गृहीत्वा प्रयवी लंकामेव स्वलील्या ॥ 42 ॥

He again became the srevant of two doorkeepers of Vaikuntha. On the other hand Sita Devi, hearing the cry ‘Ha Lakṣmana!’ became very

Śrīmaddevibhāgavatam

distressed and sent Lakṣmaṇa in search of Rāma. No sooner diś Lakṣmaṇa get out of the hermitage, the irresistible Rāvaṇa took away Sītā gladly to the city of Laṅkā.

विसपाद च रामश्र वने चूद्रा च लक्षणम् ।

नृणं च स्वाभयं माला सीतां नैव दर्शर्ग सः ॥ 4 3 ॥

मृच्छी संग्राम सुचिरं विल्लाप भृर्णे पुनः ।

पुनः पुनःख घषाम तद्वोयणपूर्वकम् ॥ 44 ॥

Now Rāmacandra, seeing Lakṣmaṇa on the way in the forest, became merged in the ocean of sorrows and without losing any time came hurriedly to the hermitage where he could not find Sītā. Instantly he fell unconscious on the ground; and, after a long time, when he regained his consciousness, he lamented and wandered here and there in search of Her.

कालेन प्राय तद्धातां गोदावरीनदीते ।

सहायावनान-कूला बब्धे सागरं हरि: ॥ 45 ॥

लंकां गत्वा रघुश्रेष्ठो जवाना सायकेन च ।

कालेन प्राय ते हत्वा राजर्षा बांधवेः सह ॥ 46 ॥

After some days on the banks of the river Godāvārī, getting the information of Sītā, he built a bridge across the ocean with the help of His monkey armies. Then he entered with his army into Lankā and slew Rāvaṇa with arrows with all his friends.

तां च विह्वरीक्षां च कारयामास सत्वम् ।

हुताशस्त्र काले पु यास्तवीं जानकीं दहो ॥ 47 ॥

उवाच छाया वर्त्र है चामं च चिनयान्सिता ।

कनिष्यापीति किमई तृपायां वव्तव मे ॥ 48 ॥

When Sītā's ordeal by fire came, Agni (Fire) handed over the real Sītā to Rāmcandra. The Shadow Sītā then humbly addressed Agni and Rāma Candra 'O Lord! What am I to do now? Settle my case.

श्रीरामानी ऊचतुः

त्वं गच्छ तपसे देखे पुक्वरं च सूपुणद्यम् ।

कृत्वा तपस्यां तत्रैव सर्वांलक्ष्मीर्धिथासि ॥ ४९ ॥

Agni and Rāmcandra both of them then said to Chāyā Sītā: "O Devi! Go to Puśkara and practise

tapasyā there; that place is the giver of religious merits and then you will be the Svarga Lakṣmī (Lakṣmī of Heaven).

सा च तद्धचनं श्रुत्वा प्रतय पुक्षे तपः ।

दिथ्यं जिलक्षवर्षे च स्वर्णलक्ष्मीर्वंभूत ॥५० ॥

सा च कालेन तपसा यजूकण्डसपुन्द्वा ।

कामिनी पोडवानां च श्रीद्वी दुवतत्मना ॥ ५१ ॥

Hearing this, the Chāyā Sītā went and practised tapasyā for the three divine lākh years and became Mahā Lakṣmī. This Svarga Lakṣmī appeared at one time from the sacrificial Kuṇḍa (pit). She was known as the daughter of Drupada and became the wife of the five Pāndavas.

कृते युगे वेदवर्ती कुग्यजसुता रूपा ।

हतायां रामपन्ती च सीतते जनकात्मजा ॥ 52 ॥

नछ्ठाया श्रीदेवी देयी द्वापरे दुवदात्मजा ।

निहायणी च सा प्रोक्ता विद्यामाना युगायरे ॥ 53 ॥

She was Veda Vatī, the daughter of Kuśadhvaja in the Satya Yuga; Sītā, the wife of Rāma and the daughter of Janaka in Tretā Yuga; and Draupadī, the daughter of Drupada, in the Dvāpara Yuga. As she existed in the Satya, Tretā, and Dvāpara Yugas, the Three Yugas, hence She is Trihāyaṇī."

नात्व उवाच

प्रिया: पछ्र कथं तस्या बभूवरुंगिनुपुंव ।

इति मचित्तसंदेई भंज संदेहर्भजन ॥ ५४ ॥

Nārada said: O Chief of Munis! O Remover of doubts! Why had Draupadi five husbands? A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this point. Remove my doubt.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

लंकारा वास्तवी सीता रामं संप्रप नारद ।

रूपयोवानसंपंत्रा छाया च बहुचितया ॥ 55 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Devarṣi! When, in the city of Laṅkā, the real Sītā came before Rāma, then Chāyā Sītā, full of youth and beauty, became very anxious. रायामानोरात्रया तत्पुयुपानते शंकरं परम् ।

कामानुता पत्नियज्ञा प्रार्थवंती पुन: पुन: ॥ 56 ॥

पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पतिज्ञाने ।

पतिं दैहि पतिं दैहि पड़ावारं चकार सा ॥ 57 ॥

Book IX Chapter XVII

Agni Deva and, Rāmachandra both told Her to go to Puškara and worship Śaṅkara. While this Chāyā Sītā was practising austerities in Puškara, She became very anxious to get a good husband and asked from Mahā Deva the boon ‘Grant me a husband’ and repeated it five times.

शिवसत्त्यार्थां शुचा प्रमूल सरिकेश्वरः ।

प्रिये तव प्रियाः पढ़ा भविष्यिति वरं द्टो । ५८ ॥ ।

तेन सा पांडवानां च बभूव कामिनी प्रिया ।

इति ते कथितं सर्वे प्रसतंव वास्तवं ग्युग् । ५९ ॥

Śiva, the chief among the humorous, witty persons, hearing this, said ‘O Dear! You will get five husband.’ and thus granted her the boon. Therefore, She became the dearest wife of the five Pāndavas. Now hear other facts.

अथ संप्राय लंकामां सीतां तपो मनोहताम् ।

विभीषणाय तां लंका दत्वासप्रोष्यां ययौ पुनः ॥ 60 ॥

एकादिशस्थलावं कृत्वा तारयं च भारते ।

जगाम सर्वैलोंक्रैक्षा सार्थ वैकुपनमेव च ॥ 61 ॥

कमलांगा वेदवती कमलायां विवेश सा ।

When the war at Laṅkā was over, Śrī Rāmacandra got his own dear wife Sītā, and in-

stalling Vibhīṣaṇa on the throne of Laṅkā, returned to Ayodhyā. He ruled for eleven thousand years in Bhārata and finally went to Vaikunṭha with his all his subjects. Vedavatī, the incarnation in part of Lakṣmī dissolved in the body of Kamalā. Thus I have described to you the pure anecdote of Vedavatī.

कथितं पुण्यमाख्यानं पुण्यदं पायानाशनम् ॥ 62 ॥

सत्ते मूर्तिमन्त्र श्वेद्धाश्यार एव च ।

संति वय्याश किष्णो स च चेवेद्वती श्रुता ॥ 63 ॥

धर्मध्वजसुताख्यानं निवोधे कवयापि ते ॥ 64 ॥

श्रति श्रीद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्थे

शोडशोस्थाय: 11 16 11

Hearing this destroys sins and increase virtue. The four Vedas geigned incarnate, in their true forms, on the lips of Vedavatī; hence She was named Vedavatī. Thus I have told you the anecdote of the daughter of Kuśadhvaja. Now hear the story of Tulasī, the daughter of Dharmadhvaja.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the incarnation of Mahā Laksmī in the house of Kuśadhvaja in Śrimaddevibhāgvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsī Veda Vyāsa.

Book IX Chapter XVII

