CHAPTER XXVIII

On Nārada's Getting Feminine Form

नारद खाया

निशायय मुनिश्छि गढ़तो मम सत्कथाम् ।

मायावलं सुदुर्जये मुनिश्चिर्यानिवतनोः ॥ १ ॥

Nārada said: “O Thou whose only wealth consists in asceticism! I am now describing to you all those good stories; hear attentively. O Muni! This Māyā and Her Power are incomprehensible even by those who are the foremost amongst the Yogins.

मायया मोहितं सर्वे जगत्थावरजंगमम् ।

बह्नादिस्त्वायपत्नसया दूर्विभाव्यया ॥ 2 ॥

कदाविसत्यलोकाढ़े धैतड़ीपे मनोहरे ।

गतोउई दूर्णनाकांशी हरेरुद्रतकर्णः ॥ 3 ॥

वादयम्हर्ती वीणां स्वतानविष्यितान् ।

गायनं गायमानस्तु साम सप्तवरात्वितम् ॥ 4 ॥

This whole Universe, moving and non-moving, from Brahmā to the blade of grass, is enchanted by that Unborn and Incomprehensible Māyā; therefore no one can escape from the hands of that Māyā. One day I wanted to see Hari, of wonderful deeds, and went out with lute in my hand from Satyaloka, to the lovely Śvetta Dvipa (the residence of Viṣṇu) singing the beautiful Sāma hymns in tune with the seven Svaras.

दृष्टो मया देववेदशुक्रमाणिगंदाधर: ।

कोस्तुभोद्वासितेरको मेयश्यामश्रतुर्षुज: ।। ५ ॥

I saw there Gādādhara, the Deva of the Devas, with four arms holding disc in one of his hands. He resembled a newly-formed rain-cloud of Śyāma colour. He was illumined with the lustre of the Kaustubha jewel in his breast. He was wearing an yellow apparel.

पीताम्बरपीधानी पुकुटाजुदराजितः ।

लक्ष्म्या सह विलासिन्या क्रीड्यामनी मुदा युत् ।। ६ ॥

बीक्ष्य मां कमला देदी गतातर्पांमन्सितात् ।

सर्वेलक्षणमम्पा सर्वेभूषणभूषिता ॥ 7 ॥

His head was beaurified with a lustrous crown. Thus the Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa was playing in amorous movements with the daughter of the ocean, fully capable to give one delight and enjoyment. Seeing me, the lovely Devi Kamalā, dear to Vāsudeva, full of youth and beauty, decorated with ornaments, endowed with all auspicious signs, superior to all the woman, went away at once (to another room) from the presence of Janārdana.

नारीर्ण प्रवरा कान्ता रूपयैवनगविता ।

सुप्रिया वासुदेवस्य वरचामीकरप्रभा ॥ 8 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

अन्तर्गूहं गतां दृष्ट्वा सिस्भुजां व्यझ्ञान्विताम् ।

मया पृष्ठो देवदेवो वनमाली जगतमृषुः ॥ 9 ॥

The breast of Laksmī Devi was becoming visible even through the cloth thrown over it; therefore she went hurriedly to the inner compartment. Seeing this I asked Janārdana, the Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the worlds, and holding a garland of forest grown flowers—thus: "O Bhagavān! O Slayer of Mura! O Padmanābha! Why has Kamalā Devi, the Mother of all the Lokas, on seeing me coming here, gone out of Your presence.

भगन्देवेवेग पवनाभ सुरारिह्न ।

कंध च मा गता शृह्या माभागच्छतननितकान् ॥ 10 ॥

नाहं विटो न वा धृतैः तापसोड़ं जगदगुरुते ।

नितेनिद्वो सिताकोधो जितमायो जनदिन ॥ 11 ॥

O Lord of the worlds! I am not a rogue nor a cheat; I have conquered my passions and am become an ascetic; I have conquered even Māyā. Therefore O Deva! What is the cause of the departure of the Kamalā Devi from here? Kindly explain this to me.

नारद उवाच

निशम्य वचनं किश्रिद्वर्युक्ते जनादनः ।

उवाच मां सित्त कृत्वा वीणावम्भुर्गो सिगम ॥ 12 ॥

Nārada said: "O Dvaipāyana! Hearing my words, expressive of my pride, Janārdana smiled and spoke to me in words sweet like the sound of a lute:

विष्यूकवाच

नार्देश्विधा नीतिनं स्थात्ययं कदाचन ।

पर्ति विज्ञान्यसाधिये कस्यचिधोषया कवचित् ॥ 13 ॥

“O Nārada! The rule in such cases is this: The wife of any man whatsoever ought not to stay before any other male outsider than her husband. माया सुरुजंया विद्यत् योगिरिभिजितमन्तः ।

सांख्यविर्द्वर्नैगहरेत्पापसेक्षा विलेत्रियः ॥ 14 ॥

O Nārada! It is very hard to conquer Māyā; even those, who by Prānāyāma have conquered their Prāna Vāyu, their organs of senses and their

food, even those Sānkhya Yogins and the Devas are not able to conquer Māyā.

देवेश्व मुनिगार्तूल यच्चयोक्तं चवो5पुंना ।

वित्तमादोस्म यतित्व नैवं वाच्यं कदाचन ॥ 15 ॥

The words that you have just now uttered that you have conquered Māyā are not fit to come out of your mouth; for by your knowledge of music, it seems that you are enchanted with the sounds of the music.

नाहे शिलो न वा बह्या जेतुं तां प्रभवोर्याजम् ।

मुभ्य: सनकाधायं कस्वं कें-ग्रे क्षमा जरे ॥ 16 ॥

Brahmā, I, Śiva, and the other Munis, none of us has been able as yet to conquer that Unborn Māyā; how, then, can it be possible that you or any other man can conquer that Māyā!

देवदेहं नृद्रें वा तिर्येन्द्रधापि वा ।

विषय्यातः शगीरं च स क्रकं तां जदेवदाम ॥ 17 ॥

वियुतन्तों कर्म भायां जेतुं शकः: पुभाम्यन्ते ।

वेदविद्योगविद्यानि सर्वजैं विज्ञानेत्रिज्ञ: ॥ 18 ॥

Any embodied being' be he a Deva, a human being, or a bird, no one is able to conquer that Māyā Unborn. Whoever is endowed with the three Gunas, be he a knower of the Vedas, or a Yogin, or conqueror of his passions, or all knowing, is not able to conquer Māyā.

कालोपीय तस्य कर्ण हि रूपधीन: स्वरूपकृत ।

तड़गे वर्तते देही विद्धान्यूर्षोंदा मध्यमः ॥ १९ ॥

The Great Time (Kāla) though formless, is one form of Māyā and fashions this universe. All the Jīvas are subservient to this Kāla, be he a good literary person, or of a mediocre nature, or an illiterate brute.

कालः क्रोतीत धर्में कदाचिद्धिकलं पुनः ।

स्वभावात्कर्मीत वारप्र दुर्जं सत्य चेहितम् ॥ 20 ॥

This Kāla sometimes makes even a religious man that kiwos Dharma confounded and eluded; so you know the nature of Māyā is very incomprehensible and Her ways mysterious.

Note: This Kāla is of the fourth dimension, time and space.

Book VI Chapter XXVIII

नारद उवाच

इत्युक्चा विराते विद्यगृहं विस्मयमानस: ।

तमवुवं जगत्रार्थ वासुदेवं सनातनम् ॥ 21 ॥

रमापते कंधेक्णा माया सा कौनूशी पुनः ।

किंयद्रुला कवसंस्थानां कस्याधाता बदल्य मे ॥ 22 ॥

O Dvaippāyana! Thus saying, Viṣṇu stopped. I was greatly astonished and asked that Eternal Vāsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the World, “O Lord of Rama! What is the form of Māyā? How is She? What is measure of Her strength? Where She resides? Whose substratum is She? Kindly tell these to me.

प्रक्रामोःप्रिय तो मारां द्रशायुग मृतीधर ।

जातुपिछ्णति तां सम्यव्यसादं कुक मापते ॥ २३ ॥

O Preserver of the Universe! I am greatly desirous to see Māyā; Shew Her to me quickly. O Lord of Rama! I am very eager to know Māyā. Be graciously pleased to describe to me the glory of Māyā."

विष्यु उवाच

त्रिगुणा साउष्टितधारा सर्वत्रा सर्वसम्मता ।

अवेबान्दिकरणा च सर्वे व्याय्य स्थिता जगत् ॥ 24 ॥

Viṣṇu said: Māyā resides everywhere throughout this whole Universe; Her nature consists of the three Guṇas; She is the substratum of all; She is omniscient, and acknowledged by all; invisible, and of diverse forms.

दिद्धा यदि ते चितने नरतारोहणं कृक ।

गरड़े मनमोतेष्ठा गच्छावोरन्य सामप्रम्न ॥ 2 5 ॥

दर्शचिधामि ते मावां दुर्जयामिततामधि: ।

दूद्वा तां ब्रहापुरं तव मा विश्वादे मन: कृधा: ॥ 2 6 ॥

O Nārada! If you want to see Māyā, then come quickly and mount with me on Garuda; we both will go elsewhere and I will shew you that Māyā, invincible by those who have not conquered themselves.

इत्युक्त्वा देवेदोवो मां सम्मार विनतास्तुमः ।

सूतमात्रस्तु गृहस्तदाग्याद्विरसिधी ।। 27 ।।

आगतं गरई वीक्ष्य आरुरोह जनदानं: ।

समातोष्य च मां पुहुं गमनाय कृतादर: ॥ 28 ॥

O Son of Brahmā! Do'n't be depressed when you see Māyā. Thus saying, Janārdana Hari remembered Garuda and instantly he came to Hari. Janārdana mounted on him and gladly made me also get up on his back and took me with Him.

चलिता विनतापुरो वैकुणवाद्राव्युवेगान् ।

प्रेरितो यत्र कृष्णेन गनृकामेन काननम् ॥ 29 ॥

महावानिन विद्यानि सारांसि सरितस्तथा ।

पुरुषामाकराईश खेटखर्षोगेत्रजान् ॥ 30 ॥

मुनीनामाश्रमात्यमायावार्थीड सुमनोहराः ।

पल्बलानि विशालानि हृद्यान्यूबन्धपूर्वितान् ॥ 31 ॥

भुगाणों च वराहाणां वृन्दान्यथलोक्य च ।

गतावारां कान्यकुळसरीयं गरडासनी ॥ 32 ॥

तत्र न्ययं सरो दिव्यं दृष्टि युब्जमपिडतम् ।

ईसकारणडवाकीर्णं चक्रवाकोपशीघितम् ॥ 33 ॥

नानावर्षीं. प्रफुल्लेशं पूज्ञैभरात्रितम् ।

गृचि मिछाजलं भूक्रयूधनाद्विराजितम् ॥ 34 ॥

मामाह भगवान् वीक्ष्य तडागं परमाबुदूनम् ।

स्पर्धकं चोद्योः क्रीं मिछे वार्ति विशेषतः ॥ 35 ॥

श्रीभगवानुवाच

पश्य नातर गर्भीरं सर: सारसनाहितम् ।

सर्वकं पशूकैश्छत्रं स्वच्छनीरामूर्तिम्न ॥ 36 ॥

In a moment Garuda, went, at his command, with the speed of wind to the forest where the Bhagavān desired to go. Mounting on Garuda we passed and saw on our way beautiful forests, nice lakes, rivers, towns, villages, huts of cultivators, towns close to the mountain, huts for cow-keepers in cowsheds, the beautiful hermitages of the Munis, lovely Jhils, tanks and lakes beautified with big lotuses, flocks of ewes, packs of wild boars, etc., till, at last, we came to a place close to Kanauj. I saw there a beautiful divine tank; nice lotuses blossomed there, spreading their sweet fragrance all around; the bees were making lovely humming noise and ravishing away the minds of men; various flowers, lilies, etc., were beautifying the place; Geese, Kāranḍavas, and Cakravākas and other acquatic fowls were playing with their cackling

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

noise, the water was very sweet like milk; the tank was defying, as it were the ocean. Seeing such a wonderful tank, the Bhagavān told me: "O Nārada! See, how beautiful is this deep tank with its clear waters, and adorned all over with lotuses! The sweet voiced flamingoes are roaming on the lake making lovely sounds!

अत्र स्नाला गमिष्याव: कान्यकुळं पुतेताम् ।

इत्युक्नवा गकडादिषु मापुतनार्थ व्यतारथत् ॥ 37 ॥

We will bathe in this tank and then go to the city Kanauj. Thus saying, He made me descend quickly from Garuda and He himself also got down. शिवस्य भगवांस्त जग्राह मम तर्जीम् ।

त्वुवनसोरं वृद्यस्तीरं मामवनतघुः ॥ 38 ॥

Then the Bhagavān smilingly caught hold of my fore finger and repeatedly praising the glory of the tank took me to its bank.

विश्रवा तद्यागे तु नित्याक्ष्यये मनोहरे ।

मातुवाच मुने स्नाने कुल त्वं विमले जले ॥ 39 ॥

We rested a while on the cool umbrageous beautiful bank when Śrī Bhagavān said: "O Muni! Better bathe you first in this tanks; next I will bathe in this very holy pool of water.

पशुवाहं क्रौथ्यामि तडागेत्रिसन्त्युपावने ।

साधुपामिव चेतोसि जलाति निर्मालिति च ॥ 40 ॥

O Nārada! Look! Look! How clear crystallike is the water of this pool like the heart of a saint; see how it smells also fragrantly in contact with the lotuses on it."

सुरपंपीति परारैसैनु पड्ज्ञानां विशेषतः ।

इत्युङोड़ं भगवता मुक्लवा शीणं भूगाबिनम् ॥ 41 ॥

When the Bhagavān spoke thus to me; I kept my lute and deer skin aside and gladly went to the edge of the tank.

स्नानाय कृतधीस्तीर गतः प्रेमस्मिततः ।

पाटी प्रशल्य हतौं च शिखां बद्धया कुग्याहम् ॥ 42 ॥

Washing then my hands and feet I tied my hair lock and, taking Kuśa grass, I performed my Acamana and, purifying myself, began to bathe myself in that tank.

कृताचय शुश्चितोये स्नातवान्सि तजले ।

यदा तस्मिजले ग्ये स्नातोर्दं पश्यतो हरेः ॥ 43 ॥

विद्यार यौरकं रूपं प्राप्त क्षीतवमनुतमम् ।

हरिपूरीत्वा वीणां मे तथा कृष्णात्रिनं शुभम् ॥ 44 ॥

While I was bathing, Hari was looking at me; by the time I took a dip, I saw that I quitted my male form and got a beautiful female form. Hari took away, then, my deer skin and mounting on Garuda went away in a moment to His own residence.

आक्रह्य गरुकं तुर्णं जगाम स्वगृहं क्षणात् ।

ततोर्कं क्षीत्मवपत्रश्राकृष्णपृष्णपितः ॥ 4 5  ॥

ततक्षणान्मनसो जाता पूर्वदैष्टस्य विस्मृतिः ।

विस्मृतोर्जी जगजाधो महती विस्मृता पुनः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Getting the female form and decorated with excellent ornaments, my memory of my previous male form vanished at once; I forgot all about my famous lute and forgot also Jagannātha, the Deva of the Devas.

संग्राय मोहितीकर्ता तडागाशिरांत बहिः ।

अपर्थ नलिनीजुई सरसतिभुतचलादम् ॥ 47 ॥

किमेत्तदिति मनसाकरं विसमयं गुहुः ।

एवं चित्तयानस्य नारीकरणस्य मे ॥ 48 ॥

I then came out of the tank in that enchanting woman form, saw the pool of water filled with clear limpid water and adorned with lotuses. Seeing that, I began to think: "What is this?" and I became very much astonished.

सहसा द्ववर्ष प्राप्तस्तर तालधजवो नृपः ।

गजाश्रवदू-दैक्षं संयुतो रथसंस्थितः ॥ 49 ॥

युवा भूषणसंवीता देह्वानिव मन्थः ।

बीक्ष्य मां भूपतितस्त रिद्विष्यूषणभूषितम् ॥ 50 ॥

While I was thus meditating in my woman form, a king, named Tāladhvaja, came there, all on a sudden, on a chariot, accompanied by numerous elephants and horses. The King looked like a second Cupid; he was decorated with various ornaments on his various limbs; he was just entering into his youth and he looked very enchanting.

Book VI Chapter XXIX

राकाचन्द्रमुखीं योषां विस्मयं परमं गतः ।

पण्ड्छ कार्मिक कल्याणि कस्य पुत्री सुरस्य वा ॥ ५ १ ॥

The King saw me at once and looking at me decked with divine ornaments and my moon-like face, was greatly astonished and asked me: "O Kalyānī! Who are you?

मानुष्य च वा काने नायर्वस्योरास्य च ।

एकानिकी कवं बाला रूपयीवनभूषिता ॥ ५२ ॥

Are you the daughter of a man or a Nāya (serpent) or of a Gandharva or a Deva? I see you are now in your youth; why are you alone here?

विवाहिता5थ कन्या वा सत्यं वद सुलोचने ।

किं पश्यसि सुकेशाने तडागेसिमनुभ्यधेम ॥ ५३ ॥

O Lovely-eyed! Has any fortune person married you? Or are you still unmarried? Speak all these

truly to me. O Fair-haired One! What are you looking at in this tank?

विकार्थिक्त पिकालापे बूहि मन्यभोगेहिनी ।

भुंश्व भोगान्मारलाभ्रि मया सह कृणोदरि ।

वार्जिहानात्मसा नूतं कृत्वा मां परितुसामम् ॥ 54 ॥

इति श्रीमदेवीभागवते महापुराणे भशुककन्धेडणाविंशो3धायक:128।

O One enchanting, as it were, like the Cupid! What is your desire? Say, O Slanting-eyed! My mind is ravished to hear your cuckoo-like voice. O One of thin waist! Choose me as your husband and enjoy various excellent things as you like."

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Nārada's getting the feminine form in the Māhapurānam Śrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Veda Vyāsa.

[1] 2014年1月1日

Book VI Chapter XXIX

