CHAPTER XXIII

On the Remaining Hells

श्रीनारायण जयाच

ये नरा: सर्वदा साध्ये अनुतं भाषयन्ति च ।

दाने विनिमयेःधर्यच टेवर्षे पापबुद्ध्यः ॥ १ ॥

ते प्रेल्याप्रु नरके अवीच्याख्येजस्तिदाफो ।

योजनानां शगतोच्छ्यादिष्युघ्नः पतिते हि ॥ २ ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! When persons, impelled by sinful motives, always speak false at the time of giving evidence or at the time of taking or giving money, they, after their death, go to the terrible hell, named Avici. There, from the summit of a mountain, one hundred Yojanas high! they are dropped at once down below with their heads inverted down.

अनाकाशे3.प्रशिरसद्वीचीनितनामके ।

यत्र स्थलं ईयते च जलवढ़ीचिसंयुतम् ॥ 3 ॥

अलीयिचित्तनस्तत्र तिलशिड्छविययुः ।।

घियते नैव देवर्षे पुनरेवावरोघते ॥ 4 ॥

Here the solid ground looks like water and appears like waves. Therefore it is called Avīci, resembling like Avīci waves. Here if the sinners body be cut to small pieces, still he does not die; rather he gets a new body when his body is all cut to pieces.

यो वा द्विजो वा राजन्यो वैश्यो वा ब्रह्मभ्यव ।

सोमपीथस्तल्कलं सुरां वा पिवतीव हि ॥ ५ ॥

प्रमादास्तु तेषां वै नियरे परियातनम् ।

कुर्बेति चमदुत्ताले पानं काणाधियसो मुने ॥ ७ ॥

वहित्ना उद्यमाणस्य निततं बहासम्भव ।

सम्भावनेत स्वस्यैव योउभ्येपि नराधमः ॥ ७ ॥

विद्याजनस्नायोषणांभ्यागचालते नरान् ।

वरीयसोप्रि न बहु मन्ते पुरुषाधमः ॥ ८ ॥

O Son of Brahma! When a man, be he a Brāhmīn, Kṣattriya, or a Vaiśya, drinks the Soma (wine) or due to inadvertence drinks wine, he is thrown into this hell. O Muni! The Yama's servants make him drink the molten iron. When a vile person being maddened by the pride of his self-learning, birth. austerities or Varna and Śārama, does not pay his respect duty to his superiors, he is thrown into the Kṣārakardama hell with his head downwards. He suffers a tremendous pain there.

स नीयते यमभटैः झारकदैरनामके ।

निर्पेयर्जाशिक्षारा घोरा दुरंसवानताज्युते ॥ 9 ॥

When a man or woman out of delusion, performs the human sacrifices (where men are immolated as victims), he or she has to eat the human flesh here.

Śrimadievbhāgavatam

ये वै नरा वर्जल्यं नरमेघेन मोहिताः ।

स्वयोर्पि चा नराण्छु खाद्वेल्य महानुने ॥ १० ॥

पशवो निहतासे तु यमसचानि संगतः ।

सीनिका इव ते सर्वे विदार्य तिशताधराय ॥ १ १ ॥

Those that killed before all sorts of beasts, come after their death into this abode of Yama, all united and like butchers, cut each others flesh by pickaxes, etc., and drink their blood and dance and sing repeatedly. They do, in fact, what the terrible Raksasas do.

अभुविष्यवित्त नृत्यन्ति गायन्ति बहुधा मुने ।

यथेह मांसभोक्ताः पुरुषादा दुर्गसदाः ॥ १ २ ॥

अनासासीय येउरण्ये ग्रामे या ब्रह्मुपूत्रम् ।

वैअंभकैकस्पत्नात्विशंभय्य जिजीविषून् ॥ १ ३ ॥

गूल्सूत्राविष्य प्रोतान्त्रीडोनोकात्कानिव ।

पागयन्ति च ते प्रेल शूलपाते पतिंत है ॥ १ ४ ॥

When persons meet with the innocent persons, wishing to live in villages or forests and raise their confidence by various such means and make them attached and finally pierce them by pointed Śūlas (trident) or pointed swords and kill them as if they were ordinary play things, they are taken after their death by the Yama dūtas and thrown into Śūlādi Naraka (pierced by Śūlas).

शूलादिपु प्रोन्दोहः क्षुतद्ध्यां चातिपीहिताः ।

तिम्भृतैः: कंककबैकितघोतश्र ताधिताः ॥ 15 ॥

पीक्षिता आत्मागतं बहुधा संस्मरिति है ।

ये भूतानुडेजबन्ति नता उल्बाणुचानः ॥ 16 ॥

They are pierced there by Śūlas and become overpowered by hunger and thirst. Herons and cranes, with their sharp beaks hunt after them to and fro. Thus tormented, they remember all their sins done in their previous lives.

यथा सप्तिकास्तेपि नरके निपर्तिंहि ।

दंद्यूकाधिधाने च यजोत्तिश्ति सर्वतः ॥ 17 ॥

पंचानना: सदमयुखा ग्रसति नरकागतान् ।

यथा विलेशया विंष क्रूर्बुद्धस्मिन्ततः ॥ 18 ॥

Those who follow stray paths and trouble the other beings as the serpents do, they fall into the Dandaśūka hell. Here worms with five face and

seven faces come from all sides and eat them as a fierce serpent devours a mouse.

येउवदेयु कुसूलाविरुहाविशु निकन्छते ।

तानपुजीघतकरतः कॉनाणपरिसेवका: ॥ १९ ॥

तेध्योपविशिष्णा च समोगच च वहिंहना ।

धूमेन च निकन्धान्ति पापकर्मतात्रान् ॥ 20 ॥

Those who confine persons in dark holes, a dark room or a dark cave they are taken by the Death servants with their arms uplifted and confined to similar dark caves, filled with poison, fire and smoke.

यो3f1तिथी-नमयग्रापातनिध्धशुत्रि चक्रुषा ।

पापेनेहताकोकेवच स्वयं गृहपतिहिंत्रः ॥ २१ ॥

तस्यापि पापवृहिंहि निरये यमकिंकतः ।

अक्षिणी वज्रतुण्डा वे ककः काकवटादयः ॥ 22 ॥

गृधा: क्रतताशायि प्रसहीताग्यर्यति है ।

य आज्ञाभिमतियिति अड़कृत्यातिनियितः ॥ 23 ॥

When a Brāhmin householder, seeing a guest coming to his house in a reasonable (proper) time, casts a furious sinful glance at him as if to burn him, the Death's attendants, the herons with thunderbolt like beaks, the crows and the Vatas and other birds and very fierce vultures all come and forcibly take out the eyes of that person who committed the aforesaid sins.

तिर्यंत्रेषण एवाज्ञाभिवर्गोंकी नराधमः ।

सितायांद्य स्थ सर्वेत्रातिल्यव्यसल्यपा ॥ 24 ॥

गृष्यद्धदयवक्रश निर्वर्ति नैव गच्छति ।

ग्रहवघ्रक्षते चार्थ से प्रेते यमकिंकरैः ॥ 25 ॥

सूचीमुखे च नरके पाचतते निजकर्मेण ।

वित्तप्रं च पुरुर्ष वायाका इत यायाक्यः ॥ 26 ॥

When person elated with vanity of his riches become too haughty and doubt over their Gurus and when their hearts and faces wither withal away, as it were, with the thoughts of their income and expenditure, and being always unhappy, hoard up money always like the Brahma Piśacas, the Death's officers take them for these Karmas to Sūcimukha Narakas and pierce all over his body with pins, as a tailor does with his cloth.

Book VIII Chapter XXIV

क्रिकाता: सर्वतोड़जैसु यूत्रै: परिवर्बेति हि ।

एते बहुविधा विनत्नरका: पायकर्मणामू ॥ 27 ॥

नरणां शताश: सन्ति यातनास्थावभूमयः ।

सहस्वगो5पि देवर्षे उक्तानुक्तलथापि हि ॥ 28 ॥

O Devarşi! True, sinful persons thus suffer hundred thousand hells. All these are very painful and tormenting. Out of these the abovenamed twenty hells give the greatest sufferings.

विशर्गित नरकानेतान् यातनाबहुलाम्नाने ।

तथा धर्मपराधापि लोकान् यान्ति सुखोक्षितान् ॥ 29 ॥

स्वधर्मों बहुधा गीतो यथा तत महानुने ।

देवीपूजनरूपो कि देव्याराधनलक्षणः ॥ 30 ॥

O Devarşi! The sinners suffer various pains in hells and virtuous persons go to the several spheres where all sorts of happinesses and pleasures reign. O Maharṣi! I have described to you many forms of

practising one's Sva Dharma; yet know this verily that the worship of the Devi's Gross Form and of Her Virāt Form is the Chief Dharma of all the persons. By worshipping the Devi, the persons have not to go to the hells.

येनानुहितमार्गेन न नरो नरकं क्रजेत् ।

सा देवी भवपायोधेक्ट्रजी धृजिता शुणान् ॥ 31 ॥

शृति श्रीमद्धौभागवते महापुरागोर्धयरमक्ये

ज्योविंशोरभ्याः: 11 23 11

In fact, when the Devi Bhagavatī is worshipped, She Herself arrange for crossing the person to the other shore of this ocean of transmigration of existence.

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the remaining hells in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VIII Chapter XXIV

