CHAPTER XVI

On the Motion of the Planets

श्रीनारायण उवाच

अथात: श्रूयतां चित्रं सोमायतीं नगामिदकम् ।

तद्वर्यनुयुत्ता नृणां शृणग्राभनिद्वर्जना ॥ १ ॥

Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now hear the wonderful movements of the planets and their positions. The auspicious and inauspicious events of the mankind, are due to the different movements of these planets.

यथा कुलातचक्रेण ध्रमता ध्रमतां सह ।

तद्ध्रशयाणां च गतिरन्या कीटादितां भवेत् ॥ 2 ॥

एवं हि राशिषुद्वेन कालचक्रेण तेन च ।

मेलं धुरं च सरतां प्रादिश्यपेय नस्वंदा ॥ 3 ॥

As in a potter's wheel going round and round, the motion of the insects crawling on the wheel, appears in a contrary direction, so the motion of the Sun and other planets moving on the Zodiac composed of the Rāsis (12 constellations) which again always moves round the Meru as an exile, appears different.

प्रहाणां भानुपुख्यानां गतिरन्यैव दृष्यते ।

नक्षत्रांतरागमित्वाद्धांतरे गमनं तथा ॥ 4 ॥

गतिद्वयं चाविरूद्धे सर्वेश्र विविणायः ।

स एव भयनानादिपुक्षो लोकाघावनः ॥ 5 ॥

नारायणोर्जितायायो लोकानां खसत्ये भ्रमन ।

कर्मशुविद्धिनिमतं तु आत्मानं वै जयीमयम् ॥ 6 ॥

Their motion from one star to another and from one constellation to another appears so likewise. These two motions therefore are not contradictory but are consistent; so it is settled everywhere by the learned Panđits (as being subservient to the Zodiac). O Nārada! He, Who is the Origin of all, Who is the Ādipuruṣa, from Whom all this Prapañca, this material world composed of the five elements remains, that Nārāyaṇa, roaming about, has divided the Trayī Ātmā into twelve parts for the perfect happiness of all and for Karma Śuddhis (the purification of Karma, acts).

कविधिष्ठीय वेदेन विविज्ञास्योक्रधास् भवत्।

यदसू क्रमेण ऋतुरु वसंतवितु च स्वयम् ॥ 7 ॥

यथोपजीभयनुजान्नुगान्ये विद्याति च ।

तमेनं पुरुषा: सर्वे जय्या च विद्यया सदा ॥ 8 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The sages furnished with Jñāna and Vijñāna have thus argued on the point, following the path as laid out in the Vedas. The Sūrya Nārāyaṇa, moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the seasons, duly for the fructification of the Karmas for the individual beings.

वर्णाधवाचपया त्वाप्रजातहेतु कर्मिभः ।

उच्चावचै: ब्रद्धया च योगानां च विलतानैः ॥ 9 ॥

अंजसा च चजते ये श्रयो विच्छिति ते मतम् ।

अवैल आत्मा लोकानां हावाभ्यूभ्यंतेषा च ॥ 10 ॥

कातचक्रगतो भूतेले मासान्द्वगाशिषिः ।

संवत्सरसावयवान्मास: पक्षद्वं दिवा ॥ 11 ॥

Those persons that worship this Ádipuruṣa, with devotion, according to the knowledge of the Vedas the customs and usages of Varuṇa (castes) and Áśrama (Brahmacarya, etc.) and with various performances of Yogas, get their fruits respectively according to their desires. This Sun is the Atman of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between the Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve months in the twelve constellations, Aries, etc. These months are the limbs of the year.

नक्ते चेति सा पारदक्षीद्वामिव्युपदिष्यते ।

याता चछमंगं स भुंजीत ऋतुरुच्छते ॥ 12 ॥

Two fortnights make one month. The 2\( \frac{1}{4} \) asterisms go to form one month according to the Solar measure, of the day and night. The period that the Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is called Rtu or the Season (i.e., two months).

संवत्सरायावय: कविभिश्रोगयवर्गितः ।

याततर्धन चाकाशीयांचा प्रचरते रखः ॥ 13 ॥

तं प्राकतना वर्णयित्व अयनं मुनिपूजिताः ।

अथ यावत्रभोग्यलं सह प्रतिनच्छिति ॥ 14 ॥

The Scientists say that this season is the limb of one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun describes within the three seasons or half the year in the Zodiac is called one Ayanam. The time taken by the Sun with earth and heavens to make a circuit of the Zodiac is called one Vastsara or year.

कात्येन सह भुजीत कालतं तं वत्सरं विधु: । संवत्सरं परिवत्सरमिद्धाततमायेव च ।। १५ ॥ अनुवत्सरमिद्धतसर्यिति पत्रकमीतिम् । भानोमधिशोष्टमसगतिधिः: कालवितमैः ॥ १६ ॥

This year is reckoned into five divisions as: Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idāvatsara, Anuvatsara, and Idvatsara. These are functioned by the Śīghra, Manda, and uniform motions of the Sun. So the Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been described. Now hear that of the Moon.

एवं भागनीति: प्रोक्ता चन्द्रवीति निवीक्षिति ।

एवं चन्द्रोकरिणमयो तल्योजनमुध्यक्ति: ॥ 17 ॥

उपलभ्यमानो मित्रस्य संवलस्यपुत्रिं च सः ।

पक्षान्यां चौषधीतयो भूते मापस्पूर्वि च सः ॥ 18 ॥

The Moon is situated one lakh Yojanas higher than the Sun and shares with the motion of the Sun for one year; and She enjoys as well every month with the Sun in the shape of the dark and bright fortnights.

सपादामाथ्यां दिवसभूषिति पक्षपूर्वि चेत्त् ।

एवं शीषगिति: सोमो धुक्ते नूनं भचककम् ॥ 19 ॥

पूर्वमाणकताधिक्षामरणां प्रीतिपावत् ।

श्रीयाणकताधिक्ष श्रितृणां चित्तरंकः ॥ 20 ॥

The Moon, the Lord of Night and of the medicinal plants also enjoys the day and night by the help of one constellation or  \( 2\frac{1}{4} \)  Naksattras. Thus, by Her Śīghragati, the Moon enjoys the Naksattras. During the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes more and more visible and gives pleasure to the Immortals by Her increasing phaces; and, during the dark fortnight by Her waning phases, She delights the Pits.

अहोरायाणि तन्यान: पूर्वापरसुवरकैः ।

सर्वीजीविकायस्य प्राणो जीवः स एव हिं ॥ 21 ॥

She performs revolution in the day and night by Her both the phases of the bright and dark fortnights. Thus She becomes the Life and Soul of all the living beings.

भुक्ते चैकैकाश्जं पुड़तिंग्रिता विधुः ।

स एव घोड़शकतः पुरुषोनाथितिः ॥ 22 ॥

मनोभयोप्रध्यमयोप्रत्याभा सुधाकरः ।

Book VIII Chapter XVI

The Moon, endowed with the highest prosperity, travels one Nakṣattra in thirty Muhūrtas. She is Full and the Soul without any beginning. She fructifies the desires (Sañkalapas) and resolves of all; hence She is called Manomaya. She is the Lord of all the medicinal plants (Osādhis); hence She is called Annamaya. She is filled with nectar; hence She is called the abode of Immortality and She gives Nirvāna (the final liberation) to all. Hence She is called Sudhākara.

देबीविंपुनमुधाविसरीमुपसबीक्रामा ॥ 23 ॥

प्राणाध्यावनशीलत्वात्य सर्वमय उच्छते ।

ततो भचकं भमति योजनानां जिलक्षतः ॥ 24 ॥

मेघ्रादिक्षणेनैव योजितं चेक्षरेण तु ।

आधारिंशतिसंख्यानि गणितानि सहाधिभित् ॥ 25 ॥

She nourishes and satisfies the Devas, Pitts, men, reptiles and trees; hence She is called "Sarvamaya." By Her influence the asterisms travel over the three lakh Yojanas. The God Himself has made the Nakṣattra Abhijit to revolve round the Meru, along with the other Nakṣattras in the Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the twenty-eighth Nakṣattra. The planet Venus (Śukra) is situated above the Moon two lakh Yojanas high.

ततः शुको दिलक्षण योजनानामधोधरि ।

पुरः पशुतसहैसावासकैस्य परिवर्ते ॥ 26 ॥

शीघ्रामन्दसमापारभिपतिभिविर्तिचयुः ।

लोकानामपुक्तूलो३य प्रायः प्रोक्तः श्यभावहः ॥ 27 ॥

He sometimes goes before the Sun, sometimes behind and some times along with Him. He is very powerful. His motion is of three kinds: (1) Śīghra, (2) Manda, and (3) uniform. He is generally favourable to all the persons and does for them many auspicious things. So, it is stated in the Śāstras.

ब्रटिविशंभगमानो भार्षव: सर्वदा मुने ।

शुक्रावलुधः समाख्यातो योजनानां द्वितक्षतः ॥ 28 ॥

श्रीमन्दसामानाभिरीतिध: शुक्रावस्त्वा ।

यदा०काद्वितिर्चेल सीमः प्रायेण तन तु ॥ 29 ॥

O Muni! Śukra, the illustrious scion of Bhrgu,

removes the obstacles to the rains. Next to Śukra, the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh Yojanas high. Like Śukra, he, too, goes sometimes in front, sometimes behind and sometimes along with the Sun. And his motion, too, is of three kinds:

अशिवाताघपातानां बृड्यादिष्यमयुचकः ।

उपरिष्ठतानो भीमो योजनानां द्विलक्षतः ॥ 30 ॥

पक्षैलिषिधिक्षिः: सोयं भूंके राषीनवैक्काः ।

ब्राद्रशपि च देवेषं यदि वको न जायते ॥ 31 ॥

Śīghra, Mandra, and uniform. When Mercury, the Son of Moon, is away from the Sun, then Ativāta (strong winds, hurricanes), Abhrapāta (the falling of meteors from the clouds) and draught and other fears arise. The planet Mars, the son of the Earth is situated two lakh Yojanas higher. Within three fortnights (45 days) he travels one Rāśī. This occurs when his motion is not retrograde.

प्रायेणायुषकृतसोयं ग्रहीशानां च सूचकाः ।

तते दिलक्षमानेने योजनानां च गीचिति: ॥ 32 ॥

एकैकसिमब्रशो गराधे भुक्ते संवर्तरं चरन ।

यदि वक्रो भवेषैवानुकूलो ब्रह्माविदानम् ॥ 33 ॥

This Mars causes all sorts of mischief, evils, and miseries to mankind. The planet Jupiter is situated two lakh Yojanas higher. He passes through one Rāśi in one year. When his motion is not retrograde, he is always in favour with the Brahma Vādis.

ततः ऋनश्रौ घोरो लक्ष्वयरपेघितः ।

योजनै: सूर्यप्रोजर्यं सिंगन्मासै: परिष्रमम् ॥ 34 ॥

एकैकराशी एपैति सर्वानाशी-महाप्रासुः ।

सर्वेभाग्युभो मन्दः प्रोक्तः कालविद्धां वरैः ॥ 35 ॥

Next to Brhaspati, comes the planet Saturn, the son of the Sun, two lakh Yojanas higher. He takes thirty months to pass over one Rāsī. This planet causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all.

तत उत्तरतः प्रोक्तमेकादासुलकक्षेः ।

योजनैः परिसंख्यातं सर्वर्शिणां च चपहलम् ॥ 36 ॥

लोकानां गं भावयन्तो मुग्नय: सप्त ते मुने ।

यत्त्रिष्टुपूर्व द्व्यानं दक्षिणं प्रक्रमिति ते ॥ 37 ॥

इति श्रीमदैर्षिणायने महापुराणोउद्यमकन्दे

पोडशो3:पायः ॥ 116 ॥

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

Therefore He is called a Manda Graha (a malefic planet). Next to it, is situated the Saptarsi maṇḍala, the Great Bear, eleven lākh Yojanas higher up. O Muni! The seven planets always do

special favours to all. These circumambulate to Visupada, the Polar Star.

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book on the motion of the planets in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vvāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

