[Ch 16 Verse 1]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now hear the wonderful movements of the planets and their positions. The auspicious and inauspicious events of the mankind, are due to the different movements of these planets.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Now hear the wonderful movements of the planets and their positions. The auspicious and inauspicious events of the mankind, are due to the different movements of these planets.

[Ch 16 Verse 2-3]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As in a potter's wheel going round and round, the motion of the insects crawling on the wheel, appears in a contrary direction, so the motion of the Sun and other planets moving on the Zodiac composed of the Rāsis (12 constellations) which again always moves round the Meru as an exile, appears different.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As in a potter’s wheel going round and round, the motion of the insects crawling on the wheel, appears in a contrary direction, so the motion of the Sun and other planets moving on the Zodiac composed of the Rāsīs (12 constellations) which again always moves round the Meru as an axle, appears different.

[Ch 16 Verse 4-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Their motion from one star to another and from one constellation to another appears so likewise. These two motions therefore are not contradictory but are consistent; so it is settled everywhere by the learned Panđits (as being subservient to the Zodiac). O Nārada! He, Who is the Origin of all, Who is the Ādipuruṣa, from Whom all this Prapañca, this material world composed of the five elements remains, that Nārāyaṇa, roaming about, has divided the Trayī Ātmā into twelve parts for the perfect happiness of all and for Karma Śuddhis (the purification of Karma, acts).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Their motion from one star to another and from one constellation to another appears so likewise. These two motions therefore are not contradictory but are consistent; so it is settled everywhere by the learned Pundits (as being subservient to the Zodiac). O Nārada! He, Who is the Origin of all, Who is the Ādi Puruṣa, from Whom all these have sprung, Who is endowed with six extraordinary powers, in Whom all this Prapañca, this material world composed of the five elements remains, that Nārāyaṇa, roaming about, has divided the Trayī Ātmā into twelve parts for the perfect happiness of all and for Karma Śuddhis (the purification of Karma, acts).

[Ch 16 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The sages furnished with Jñāna and Vijñāna have thus argued on the point, following the path as laid out in the Vedas. The Sūrya Nārāyaṇa, moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the seasons, duly for the fructification of the Karmas for the individual beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The sages furnished with Jñān and Vijñāna have thus argued on the point, following the path as laid out in the Vedas. The Sūrya Nārāyaṇa, moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the seasons, duly for the fructification of the Karmas of the individual beings.

[Ch 16 Verse 9-11]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those persons that worship this Ádipuruṣa, with devotion, according to the knowledge of the Vedas the customs and usages of Varuṇa (castes) and Áśrama (Brahmacarya, etc.) and with various performances of Yogas, get their fruits respectively according to their desires. This Sun is the Atman of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between the Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve months in the twelve constellations, Aries, etc. These months are the limbs of the year.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those persons that worship this Ādipuruṣa, with devotion, according to the knowledge of the Vedas the customs and usages of Varṇa (castes) and Āśrama (Brahmacarya, etc.), and with various performances of Yogas, get their fruits respectively according to their desires. This Sun is the Ātman of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between the Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve months in the twelve constellations, Aries, etc. These months are the limbs of the year.

[Ch 16 Verse 12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Two fortnights make one month. The 2\( \frac{1}{4} \) asterisms go to form one month according to the Solar measure, of the day and night. The period that the Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is called Rtu or the Season (i.e., two months).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Two fortnights make one month. The 21 asterisms go to form one month according to the Solar measure, of the day and night. The period that the Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is called Ritu or the Season (i.e., two months).

[Ch 16 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Scientists say that this season is the limb of one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun describes within the three seasons or half the year in the Zodiac is called one Ayanam. The time taken by the Sun with earth and heavens to make a circuit of the Zodiac is called one Vastsara or year.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Scientists say that this season is the limb of one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun describes within the three seasons or half the year in the Zodiac is called one Ayanam. The time taken by the Sun with earth and heavens to make a circuit of the Zodiac is called one Vatsara or year.

[Ch 16 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This year is reckoned into five divisions as: Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idāvatsara, Anuvatsara, and Idvatsara. These are functioned by the Śīghra, Manda, and uniform motions of the Sun. So the Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been described. Now hear that of the Moon.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This year is reckoned into five divisions as :-- Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Iḍāvatsara, Aṇuvatsara, and Idvatsara. These are functioned by the Śīghra, Maṇḍa, and uniform motions of the Sun. So the Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been described. Now hear that of the Moon.

[Ch 16 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Moon is situated one lakh Yojanas higher than the Sun and shares with the motion of the Sun for one year; and She enjoys as well every month with the Sun in the shape of the dark and bright fortnights.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Moon is situated one lakh Yoyanas higher than the Sun and shares with the motion of the Sun for one year; and She enjoys as well every month with the Sun in the shape of the dark and bright fortnights.

[Ch 16 Verse 19-20]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Moon, the Lord of Night and of the medicinal plants also enjoys the day and night by the help of one constellation or \( 2\frac{1}{4} \) Naksattras. Thus, by Her Śīghragati, the Moon enjoys the Naksattras. During the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes more and more visible and gives pleasure to the Immortals by Her increasing phaces; and, during the dark fortnight by Her waning phases, She delights the Pits.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Moon, the Lord of Night and of the medicinal plants also enjoys the day and night by the help of one constellation or 2¼ Nakṣattras. Thus, by Her Śīghragati, the Moon enjoys the Nakṣattras. During the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes more and more visible and gives pleasure to the Immortals by Her increasing phases; and, during the dark fortnight by Her waning phases, She delights the Pitris.

[Ch 16 Verse 21]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She performs revolution in the day and night by Her both the phases of the bright and dark fortnights. Thus She becomes the Life and Soul of all the living beings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She performs revolution in the day and night by Her both the phases of the bright and dark fortnights. Thus She becomes the Life and Soul of all the living beings.

[Ch 16 Verse 22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Moon, endowed with the highest prosperity, travels one Nakṣattra in thirty Muhūrtas. She is Full and the Soul without any beginning. She fructifies the desires (Sañkalapas) and resolves of all; hence She is called Manomaya. She is the Lord of all the medicinal plants (Osādhis); hence She is called Annamaya. She is filled with nectar; hence She is called the abode of Immortality and She gives Nirvāna (the final liberation) to all. Hence She is called Sudhākara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Moon, endowed with the highest prosperity, travels one Nakṣattra in thirty Muhūrtas. She is Full and the Soul without any beginning. She fructifies the desires (Saṅkalpas) and resolves of all; hence She is called Manomaya. She is the Lord of all the medicinal plants (Oṣadhis); hence She is called Annamaya. She is filled with nectar; hence She is called the Abode of Immortality and She gives Nirvāṇa (the final liberation) to all.

[Ch 16 Verse 23-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► She nourishes and satisfies the Devas, Pitts, men, reptiles and trees; hence She is called "Sarvamaya." By Her influence the asterisms travel over the three lakh Yojanas. The God Himself has made the Nakṣattra Abhijit to revolve round the Meru, along with the other Nakṣattras in the Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the twenty-eighth Nakṣattra. The planet Venus (Śukra) is situated above the Moon two lakh Yojanas high.
NEW CORR ENG ──► She nourishes and satisfies the Devas, Pitris, men, reptiles and trees; hence She is called “Sarvamaya.” By Her influence the asterisms travel over the three lakh Yoyanas. The God Himself has made the Nakṣattra Abhijit to revolve round the Meru, along with the other Nakṣattras in the Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the twenty-eighth Nakṣattra. The planet Venus (Śukra) is situated above the Moon two lakh Yoyanas high.

[Ch 16 Verse 26-27]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He sometimes goes before the Sun, sometimes behind and some times along with Him. He is very powerful. His motion is of three kinds: (1) Śīghra, (2) Manda, and (3) uniform. He is generally favourable to all the persons and does for them many auspicious things. So, it is stated in the Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He sometimes goes before the Sun, sometimes behind and sometimes along with Him. He is very powerful. His motion is of three kinds :-- (1) Śīghra, (2) Maṇḍa, and (3) uniform. He is generally favourable to all the persons and does for them many auspicious things. So it is stated in the Śāstras.

[Ch 16 Verse 28-29]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Śukra, the illustrious scion of Bhrgu, removes the obstacles to the rains. Next to Śukra, the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh Yojanas high. Like Śukra, he, too, goes sometimes in front, sometimes behind and sometimes along with the Sun. And his motion, too, is of three kinds:
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Śukra, the illustrious scion of Bhṛgu, removes the obstacles to the rains. Next to Śukra, the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh Yoyanas high. Like Śukra, he, too, goes sometimes in front sometimes behind and sometimes along with the Sun. And his motion too, is of three kinds :--

[Ch 16 Verse 30-31]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śīghra, Mandra, and uniform. When Mercury, the Son of Moon, is away from the Sun, then Ativāta (strong winds, hurricanes), Abhrapāta (the falling of meteors from the clouds) and draught and other fears arise. The planet Mars, the son of the Earth is situated two lakh Yojanas higher. Within three fortnights (45 days) he travels one Rāśī. This occurs when his motion is not retrograde.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- Śīghra, Maṇḍa, and uniform. When Mercury the Son of Moon, is away from the Sun, then Ativāta (strong winds, hurricanes), Abhrapāta (the falling of meteors from the clouds) and draught and other fears arise. The planet Mars, the son of the Earth is situated two lakh Yoyanas higher. Within three fortnights (45 days) he travels one Rāśī. This occurs when his motion is not retrograde.

[Ch 16 Verse 32-33]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Mars causes all sorts of mischief, evils, and miseries to mankind. The planet Jupiter is situated two lakh Yojanas higher. He passes through one Rāśi in one year. When his motion is not retrograde, he is always in favour with the Brahma Vādis.
NEW CORR ENG ──► This Mars causes all sorts of mischief, evils, and miseries to mankind. The planet Jupiter is situated two lakh Yoyanas higher. He passes through one Rāśī in one year. When his motion is not retrograde, he is always in favour with the Brahmā Vādis.

[Ch 16 Verse 34-35]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next to Brhaspati, comes the planet Saturn, the son of the Sun, two lakh Yojanas higher. He takes thirty months to pass over one Rāsī. This planet causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next to Brihaspati, come the planet Saturn, the son of the Sun, two lakh Yoyanas higher. He takes thirty months to pass over one Rāśī. This planet causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all.

[Ch 16 Verse 36-116]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Šrimaddevībhāgavatam Therefore He is called a Manda Graha (a malefic planet). Next to it, is situated the Saptarsi maṇḍala, the Great Bear, eleven lākh Yojanas higher up. O Muni! The seven planets always do special favours to all. These circumambulate to Visupada, the Polar Star. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book on the motion of the planets in the Mahā Purānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vvāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore He is called a Maṇḍa Graha (a malefic planet). Next to it, is situated the Saptarṣi maṇḍala, the Great Bear, eleven lakh Yoyanas higher up. O Muni! The seven planets always do special favours to all. These circumambulate the Viṣṇupada, the Polar Star. Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book on the motion of the planets in the Mahā Purāṇam Śrī Mad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
