CHAPTER VI

On Vrtrasura Slain

व्यास उवाच

पूर्व प्राप्तवरा देवा ऋष्यवघु तपोधना: ।

जम्पु: सर्वे च संमेऋ चूत्रस्याममुत्तम् ।

ददुशूलत तं वृयं ज्वलनामि तेजसा ॥ १ ॥

धक्ष्यन्तीमव लोकास्ती-ग्रास्त्तमिव चामरान् ।

ऋष्योय दय ततोघ्येल चूजभूचुः। प्रियं वचः ॥ २ ॥

देवकायाँधीयद्व्यर्थे सायमकृतं रसात्मकम् ।

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus getting the boons from the Devi, the Devas and the Rsis blazing with their asceticism, all united and consulted with each other; then they went to the excellent Āśrama of Vṛtra. There they saw Vṛtra in a sitting posture and with his own Tejas (fiery spirit in him) as if ready to burn the three worlds and to devour all the Devas. The Rsis, then, spoke to Vṛtra the sweet words full of sentiments for the serving of the Devas' ends, according to the principle of conciliation.


ऋषय ऊचुः

वृत्र वृत्र महाभाग सर्वलोकभयङ्कर ॥3॥

व्याप्तं त्वयैतत्सकलं ्रह्मापडमखिलं feet ।

शक्रेण तब at यत्ततु सौख्यविघातकम्‌ ॥ 4 ॥

“O highly fortunate Vrtra! Terrific to all the

Lokas! You have now established your dominion
in all the places over this whole Universe, but your
enmity with Indra is the only cause to interrupt
you in your happiness; there is no doubt in this.
युवयोर्दुःखदं ant चिन्तावृद्धिकरं परम्‌ ।

न त्वं स्वपिषि सन्तुष्टो न चापि मघवा तथा ॥ 5 ॥

सुखं स्वपिति चिन्तार्तो ष्ठयोर्यद्ठरिजं भयम्‌ ।

युबयोर्युध्यत्तोः कालो व्यतीतस्तु महानिह ॥ 6 ॥

पीड्यन्ते च प्रजाः सर्वाः सदेवासुरमानवाः ।

This enmity has increased much the anxicty of
you both and therefore has grown very painful.
Neither you nor Indra can go to sleep peacefully,
there is always that fear hanging on you both, on
account of that enmity. And, see! A long long while
has passed away since the last battle was fought
between you two; yet all the Devas, Asuras, men
and other subjects, are feeling a sense of oppression
and pain.

संसारेऽत्र सुखं ग्राहा ठुःखं हेयमिति स्थितिः ॥ 7 ॥

न सुखं कृतवैरस्य भवतीति विनिर्णयः ।

In this world happiness is the only thing to be
sought for and pain is to be avoided; this is the
eternal state of things. Never does that man who
Book VI Chapter VI

practises enmity with another, get happiness; this has been ascertained by the wise.

संधामासिका: शूरान्यशंसिति न पधिडता: ॥ 8 ॥

युद्धं शूझारचतुरा झूत्रमार्थविधाताकम् ।

पृष्यैरिति न योद्वयं किं पुनर्निशितः शरैः ॥ 9 ॥

युद्धे विजयसन्देहो निश्रयं बाणताडनम् ।

It is only those brave warriors, that found taste in warfare, that approve of battles; but the wise that are expert in amorous enjoyments do not like battle as destroying the sensual enjoyments; they do not like fighting with flowers even; what to say with sharpened arrows! In a battle, the victory is doubtful but the shooting of arrows is certain.

दैवार्थीनिर्दे विश्वं तथा जयपराजयी ॥ 10 ॥

दैवार्थीनाथिति जाला न योद्धल्यं कदाचन ।

This world is dependent on Fate (Daiva, i. e. dependent on the cosmic rulers or deities or Devas of the Universe), so is victory or defeat.

कातेश्व शोजनं स्नानं श्रणयायां शवनं तथा ॥ ११ ॥

परिचर्यापरा भायां संसारे सुखसाधनम् ।

So knowing this, one ought never to fight. Bathing in proper time, taking food and sleeping in fixed times and having a chaste serving wife, these are the means towards happiness in this world.

किं सुखं युध्यतः संखेये बाणवृष्टिभयजूते ॥ 12 ॥

खडपाणतातिरीउे च त्वापउरातिसुखुपरे ।

While in warfares, shooting terrible arrows and striking with fierce axes take place; what happiness can there possible exist? Rather the enemy finds pleasure there.

संग्रामे मरणात्वर्गसुखप्राप्तिरिति सूकटम् ॥ 13 ॥

प्रलोभनवरं वावक्यं नोदनार्थे निर्यक्तम् ।

There is a saying that death in battles leads one to Heaven, but this is merely an enticing statement, inciting one to war! Really it is fruitless.

छित्वा देहं व्यथा प्राय्य शुगालकरादिषिः ॥ 14 ॥

पृशत्यवर्गसुखवर्गिक को वां वांळिति मन्दीः ।

Supposing that happiness comes ultimately to those who pain their bodies by being shot with

arrows and who allow their carcasses being devoured by the crows and jackals, then no man, even of dull understanding, will like this, what to speak of intelligent persons!

सख्य भवतु ते वूत्र ग्रंक्षण मल स्त्र निव्यदा ॥ १५ ॥

अवाप्यसि सुखं त्वं च शक्रशापि नितन्तम् ।

Therefore, O Vītra! Let everlasting peace and friendship be established between you and Indra; both of you in that case will derive everlasting peace and happiness.

वयं च तापासः सर्वे गन्धर्वांशि निजाभे ॥ 16 ॥

सुखावासं गमिष्यामः शान्ते बैरेस्पृत्रेव वाम् ।

Moreover if the enmity between you terminates from this instant, then we, the ascetics and Gandharvas will, no doubt, be able to remain in our own respective Asrams with great comfort.

संग्रामे युव्योर्गिते वर्तीनाते द्विवानिणम् ॥ 17 ॥

पीड़ान्ते मुनय: सर्वे नान्यतः किज्ञान नतः ।

O Powerful Hero! Owing to incessant wars between you and Indra, the Munis, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and beings are all day and night, suffering very much.

सर्वेर्गा शान्तिकामानां सख्यायिष्ठामहे वयम् ॥ 18 ॥

मुनवस्त्वं च शक्रश्र प्राप्नवन्तु सुखं किल ।

For the happiness of all peace loving persons, we, the Munis, the residents of the forest, earnestly desire that there be formed friendship between you two. We desire that you, Indra and all the Jivas get happiness.

मध्यस्थाश्रु वयं यून युवयेः सत्यकारणे ॥ 19 ॥

गर्षय कार्यविज्ञान प्रयेजयामो विधः पित्रम् ।

O Vītrā! We stand as mediators in this treaty between you and Indra; we will make each party swear on oath and thus make it conducive to the happiness of both.

ग्रास्तु सगधाकृत्वा यथोक्तांश तयात्रः ॥ 20 ॥

चित्रं ते प्रीतिसंयुक्तं कार्वितु तु साय्यन्तम् ।

Indra will now swear on oath before you on the terms that you will dictate and thus will make your heart cheerful.

सत्याधारा धरा नूनं सलैने च दिवाकाः ॥ 2 1 ॥

तपत्ययं ययाकालं वायुः सलैने वायवा ।

Know this verily that this earth stands on Truth, the sun rises for the sake of Truth, the winds blow all along for Truth and the boundless ocean never oversteps its limit for Truth.

उद्वनाविगि मवाँदिं सलैनेव न मुड़जिति ॥ 2 2 ॥

तस्माललेन सख्यं वां घाववष्टा यथासुखम् ।

एकत्र शयनकीडा जलकेलिं: सुखासनम् ॥ 2 3 ॥

युवाभ्यां संवेशा कार्य कर्तव्य मेल्यमेच च ।

Therefore let your friendship, be established on Truth. Thus tied together by bonds of friendship let you two sleep, play, make sports in water and sit together happily.

व्यास उवाच:

महर्विवचनं श्रुत्वा तानुवाच महापति: ॥ 24 ॥

अवश्यं भगवन्तो मे माननीयात्मतविस्वतः ।

Vāśa said: O King! Hearing the Maharsi's words, the highly intelligent Vītra began to say: "O Rsis! You are possessed with knowledge and many other qualifications and you are ascetics; you are therefore to be respected by me.

घवन्तो मुपयः स्वापि न मिष्याविदितो भृगम् ॥ 25 ॥

सदाचाग: सुशान्ताश्र न विद्युशलकारणम् ।

You are the Munis and therefore you never speak anywhere falsehood; your conduct is good and you practise rites and ceremonies; you are calm; therefore you do not know the causes of pretexts.

कृतवैरी शेड सत्को कामुके च गतलिषि ॥ 26 ॥

निर्जैजे वैय कत्नेयं सख्यं मतिमता सदा ।

The intelligent should never cultivate friendship with a knave, licentious persons who is of understanding, an infamous, and a shameless person, specially if he be an enemy.

निर्जैजोयं दुगचारो बहुहा लपेर: शकः ॥ 27 ॥

न विश्वासातु कतिथ्यः सर्ववैवेदुगे जले ।

This vicious Indra is shameless, deceitful, licentious, and the killer of a Brāhmaṇa, therefore no faith can ever be placed on such persons.

भवन्तो निपुणा: सर्वे न श्रोहमतवः सदा ॥ 28 ॥

अनस्विभ्रासु शान्तलाचितानामसित्वादिनाम् ।

You are saints and added with all good qualifications; therefore your minds never play in the mischievous thoughts of others; it is because your heart is calm and quiet that you cannot understand the minds of the deceitful and treacherous; therefore you ought never to stand as mediators between any two persons.

मुनय ऊचुः

जनुः कृतस्य भोक्ता वै शुभस्य त्वशुभस्य च ॥ 29 ॥

ग्रेहं कृत्वा कुतः शान्तिमानुयावघतेनः ।

विश्वासघातकर्तानो नरकं बाति निश्रयम् ॥ 30 ॥

दुःखं च समवामोति नूनं विश्वासघातकः ।

निष्कृतिविद्धहरुणां सुरापानां च निष्कृति: ॥ 31 ॥

विश्वासघातिनां नैव मिच्रद्रोहकृतामपि ।

समयं बृहि सर्वेत्र यथा ते चेतोस पुर्णम् ॥ 32 ॥

तेनैव समयेनाए सचिः: स्यानुभयो: किल ।

The Munis said: “O King! All the creatures certainly enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether good or bad; how then, can persons, of perverted intellect, obtain peace when they do mischief to others. The treacherous persons certainly go to hell and suffer miseries always. The slayers of Brāhmaṇas and the drunkards may get liberation; but never the faithless and those who go against their friends get off free; these will have to suffer undoubtedly in the hells. Therefore, O Knower of all things! Give out clearly what is going on exactly in your mind and the exact terms that you want; and the treaty will be made between you and Indra exactly according to those terms.

यूत्र उवाच

न शुष्केण न चार्जेन नाप्यना न च द्राकणा ॥ 33 ॥

न बजेण महाभाग न द्विति निशि नैव च ।

वध्यो भवेय चिश्रितः शकस्य सह देवतैः ॥ 34 ॥

एवं मे रोजते सक्थः शक्केण सह नान्थया ।

Vītra said: “O highly fortunate Munis! I can enter into a treaty of peace with Indra only on the

Book VI Chapter VI

condition that Indra with all the other Devas will not kill me in day or in night with any dry or liquid substance or with wood, stone, or thunderbolt and on no other terms.

व्यास उवाच

ऋष्यसन्तं तदा प्रजुबाँबिमयेच खपतुः ॥ 35 ॥

समयं श्रावयामासुस्ताजीय सुंशघम् ।

इत्रोप्रि शरणधोत्तरा चकार विगातज्ञः ॥ 36 ॥

साधिधा यावकं कृत्वा सुनीनां सक्रियों किल ।

युस्तु वचनैस्तस्य विश्वासमगमतदा ॥ 37 ॥

वपूव मिववच्छेके सहचयपरायण: ।

Vyāsa said: “O King! The Rṣis then gladly accepted his word and brought Indra and recited to him the terms of the treaty of peace. Indra, then, swore, on oath, before the Munis with Fire as the Witness that he would comply with the terms of the treaty and was thus freed from his heavy thoughts and felt that he had been rid of a fever. Vṛtra, then, relied on Indra’s words, became his friend, and began to live, play and enjoy with him.

कदाचिश्वंने चोगी कदाचिश्दन्यादने ॥ 38 ॥

कदाचिशदुवेदेसरी मोद्याने विचरेतुः ।

एवं कृते च संधाने चुत्र: प्रभृवितोप्रवत् ॥ 39 ॥

शकोप्रिय बधकामस्तु तदुपायान्त्रित्यत् ।

रंधानेची समुवित्नस्तदासीम्यवा भृणग् ॥ 40 ॥

They felt pleasure by their union and began to roam some times in the Nandana Garden, sometimes in the Gandha Mādana, sometimes on the shores of oceans. Vītra was very much delighted when they were thus united in friendship; but Indra watched him to find his faults; thus sometime passed.

एवं चितयन्तस्य काल: समविश्वतैन ।

चिश्रासं परपं प्राप वृत्रः शक्रेस्तितरणो ॥ 41 ॥

एवं कतिचिद्वद्वानि गतानि समये केतु ।

चृस्य मणोपायाम्नसीड़ोप्रधचितन्ति ॥ 42 ॥

A few years passed away after the treaty had been concluded. And the straight-forward Vītra began to place very much confidence on Indra; but Indra meditated on the means how to kill him.

त्वैहिकदा सुर्त प्राह विश्वस्तं पाकगासने ।

पुर्र चूर महाभाग शृणु मे वचनं हित्म ।। ४३ ॥

न विश्वासतु कतव्यः कृतवौर कधवंन ।

मध्या कृतवैरसंत स्वाउसूयापर: पौः ॥ 44 ॥

लोभान्मतो ब्रेपत: परदुःखोत्सवाचितः ।

परदारलपटः स पायबुद्धः प्रताकः ॥ 45 ॥

रंधान्ये की श्रीहरागो मायादारी नेपतादारीः ।

One day Viśvakarma, knowing that his son Vṛtāśura placed implicit confidence on Indra, called his son and said: "O my son Vṛtra! Hear my good words, See, it is never advisable to trust anybody with whom there has arisen once the enmity. Indra is your greatest enemy; he always intends evil to you; therefore do not trust him any more. Indra is never to be trusted, who is always covetous, inimical, rejoicing at others' sufferings, licentious and addicted to others' wives; vicious, deceitful, finding faults with others, always jealous, a juggler, and puffed up with vanity.

यः प्रशिक्षोदो मातुर्गभीच्छेदे चकार ॥  ४ ६ ॥

सपत्कृतः सपत्कृतः कंद्रनामनानुतः ।

O Child! What more shall I say than this fact that villain, without fearing sin, easily entered into the womb of his mother and cut the crying child in the womb into seven pieces and then each seventh part again into seven parts, thus altogether into forty-nine parts.

तस्मात्युत्र न कत्नीय विश्वासस्तु कर्धंचन ॥ 47 ॥

कृतपायस्य का लज्जा पुनः पुत्र पुत्र कर्दितः ।

Therefore O my son! He is never to be trusted on any account. He who is always addicted to vicious never feels shame in perpetrating again another crime."

व्यास उवाच

एवं प्रवीधितः पित्रा वचनैहैतुसंयुतेः ॥ 48 ॥

न बुधोध ततु वुत आसाम्रभग्नः किल ।

स कदाचित्समुझ्नने तपाप्यन्महासुरुम् ॥ 49 ॥

संध्याकाल उपायुने मुहूर्तीति दारुणे ।

ततः सझित्य मघवा वरदानं महात्मानाम् ॥ 50 ॥


संध्येयं वर्तेत रौद्रा न तारिभिंद्वसो न च ।

हन्त्योरयं यया चाहा बलैनेव न संशयः ॥ 51 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Vṛtra's death time drew nigh; hence he could not take his father's words as auspicious, though he was warned by his father in words full of meaning. One day, in the evening time, at a very inauspicious dreadful moment, Indra saw Vṛtra on the shore of an ocean and began to think of the boon granted by Brahmā to the Asura thus: "Now this is the terrible evening time; this cannot be called day nor can it be called night, and this demon is also here alone in this solitary place; it is advisable therefore to effect his death by force, there is no doubt in this.

एकाकी विजने चार संप्राप्त: समयोचितः ।

एवं विचार्यं मनसा सम्मार हरिमध्ययम् ॥ 52 ॥

तजाजगाम भयावानुरूपय: पुर्वशेत्तमः ।

वज़मध्ये प्रविश्यसी संविधानो भयावाहरि: ॥ 53 ॥

इज्जे बूबिंदं चक्रातगृ तदा चूवयं प्रति ।

इति संचिंव्य मनसा कर्थ हन्यां रिंगुं गे ॥ 54 ॥

अजेदं संखांव सर्वदैवेक्षे दानवैस्थाव ।

यदि वृत्र न हन्यम्य वझविव्या माडावलम् ॥ 55 ॥

न श्रोगे मन नृन स्यासस्थां रिपुत्णगत् ।

Thus arguing in his mind, Indra remembered the Undecaying Soul Hari. Bhagavān, the Best of Puruṣas came there, unseen by anybody, and entered into the thunderbolt; Indra quickly collected himself to kill Vṛtrāsura; but he thought how he could slay this Demon, unconquerable in the battle; and if he did not slay his enemy then by deceit, then his enemy would continue to live, and it would be possible for him to get his own welfare.

अपां केने तदापश्यत्समूरे पवतीतोपम् ॥ 56 ॥

नायं रुष्को न चाह्रौदयं न च शखमिदं तथा ।

अपां केने तदा शकने जग्राह किल लीया ॥ 57 ॥

परां शर्िक न समतर भवत्वा परमया दुतः ।

मृत्तमात्रा तत देवी स्वांगं केने न्याधायपत् ॥ 58 ॥

घड़े तदावृतं क्षिं प्रकार हतस्विनुम् ।

फेनावृत्ते पर्यिं तन शक्रशिक्षेप ते प्रति ॥ 59 ॥

While he was thus thinking, he saw the foam of

the waters of the ocean as big as a mountain; thinking that foam not to be dry nor wet and considering that foam not to be any weapon, he easily took that foam and instantly remembered with a heartful devotion the Highest Force Bhuvaneśvarī. On Her remembrance, the Bhagavati infused Her part into that foam and the thunderbolt, instilled with the force of Nārāyaṇa, was covered, too, by that foam.

सहसा निपपातायु वज्ञाहत इशचलः ।

यासवस्तु प्रहात्मा बभूव निहते तदा ॥ 60 ॥

त्रयपक्षे महेन्द्र तमसुर्निविधेस्तदैः ।

Indra, then, hurled the thunderbolt covered with foam on Vṛtra; and the Demon, thus struck, instantly fell down like a mountain. When Vṛtrāsura was thus killed, Indra became very glad; the Rsis began to praise him with various hymns.

हतगुरु प्रहृत्ता कासवः सह द्वैशैः ॥ 6 1 ॥

देर्वीं संपुज्यामास यदसाद्धादो तिथु: ।

प्रसाद्यामास तदा स्तोत्रनंनिधिवेरिधि ॥ 6 2 ॥

देवोहानो परागरंकः प्रसाद्यमकतोद्धरि: ।

पदारामायमी भूति स्थायमायाम सायक: ॥ 6 3 ॥

त्रिकालं महर्ती पूजां चक्रः सर्वेशि पिनर्जितः ।

तदारभूषिति देवानां श्रीदेवी कुलदेवम् ॥ 6 4 ॥

Indra, then, with all the other Devas worshipped the Devi, through Whose Grace the enemy had been killed and they praised Her with various hymns. The image of the Bhagavati, the Supreme Sakti was built of ruby and installed in the Nandana Garden. O King! Since then all the Devas used to worship the Devi thrice a day, morning, midday and evening and since then the Śrī Devi became the tutelary deity of the Gods.

विष्णुं विष्वज्ञश्रेषुं पूजयामास चासव: ।।

तातो हते महावीयें घूत्र देवभयबूजे ॥ 65 ॥

प्रववी च शिगो वायुर्जक्षुदैवतासता ।

हते तत्स्मनार्थवाँ यक्षाराक्षसिक्रातः ॥ 66 ॥

Indra worshipped then Viṣṇu also, the Highest of the Gods. When the terrible powerful Vītrāsura was killed, the auspicious wind began to blow

Book VI Chapter VII

gently; the Devas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, and Kinnaras began to roam with great joy.

इत्थं बुकः पराशतिभूप्रयेतयुपत्नेनतः । तया कृतविमोहाच्छ शोक्षण सहसा हतः ॥ 67 ॥ ततो वृत्रसिद्धानीति देयी लोकेषु गीयते । शोक्षण निहतत्वाच्छ शोक्षण हत उच्छते ॥ 68 ॥ द्वी तैमादैदीभागतते महापुराणे भदकल्पं चक्टोर्धयाः ॥ 6 ॥

Vrtrasura was deluded by the Maya of Bhagavati, and Her force entered into the foam;

hence Indra was capable to kill him suddenly and it is, for this reason, that the Devi, the Goddess of the world, is known in the three worlds as "Vrtranihantri," the slayer of Vrtra. But at the first sight Indra killed him by means of the foam; hence the people say that Vrtra was killed by Indra.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the slaying of Vrtrasura in the Mahapurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa.

CHANDED VII

Book VI Chapter VII

