CHAPTER VIII

On the Greatness of Kali

श्रीनारायण उवाच

सरस्वती पुण्यक्षेत्रमाजगाम च भारते ।

गंगाशपेन कल्या स्वयं तस्थी हरे: पदे ॥ १ ॥

भारती भारतं गत्वा बाह्यी च बह्वण: प्रिया ।

वाण्यधित्यादुवेदी सा तेन वाणी प्रकर्षितिति ॥ 2 ॥

Nārānyaa said: A part of Sarasvatī descended in this Bhārata Punya Bhūmi (land of merits), owing to the curse of Gāngā; and She remained in full in Viṣṇu's region, the abode of Vaikunṭha. She is named Bhāratī, on account of Her coming to Bhārata; she is called Brāhmī because she is dear to Brahmā; and She is called Vānī as She presides over Speech.

सरोहायां च सोतासु सर्वेत्र ही रुपयते ।

हरि: सरस्वांस्तस्ये चैने नामा सरस्वती ॥ 3 ॥

सरस्वती नदी सा च तीर्थेक्षा च पावनी ।

पार्थितं पापदाहाय जलदान्नस्वाक्षिपणी ॥ 4 ॥

Hari is seen everywhere, in tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He resides in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvān. Vānī is the Śakti of that Sarasvān; therefore She is denominated Sarasvatī. The river Sarasvatī is a very sacred Tīrtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of sins, of sinners.

पश्चाद्वारीयी नीता महीं भागीरेवेन च ।

स वै जगाम कर्या वाणीशपाने नाद ॥ 5 ॥

तत्रैव समये तां च द्वारा शिरसा शिवः ।

वेगं सेतुमयं शक्तो घुवः प्रार्थनया विधुः ॥ 6 ॥

O Nārada! Through the curse of Sarasvatī, the Devi Gāngā also assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought down to this earth at the request of Bhagiratha Hence she is called Bhāgirathi. While Gāngā was rushing down to the earth Śiva capable to bear the great rush of Her, held Her on His head at the request of the Mother Earth.

पदा जामा कलया सा च पदावाती नदी ।

भारतं भारतीशापात्त्वयं तस्थो हरे: पदे ॥ 7 ॥

ततोर्ज्या या सा कल्या लेपे जन्य च भारते ।

धार्मवजसुता लक्ष्मीविंख्याता तुलसीति च ॥ 8 ॥

Lakṣmī also, through the curse of Sarasvatī came in part of parts to Bhārata as the river Padmāvatī. But She remained in full with Hari. Lakṣmī appeared also in, Her other part as the well-known daughter Tulasī of the king Dharmadhvaja in India.

पुरा सरस्वतीशपात्यश्राच्च हरिशपात: ।

बंभूव युक्षरूपा सा कल्या विश्वपावनी ॥ 9 ॥

कलः: पढ़सहर्षे च वर्ष स्थल्या च भारते ।

जग्मुताशु सरिद्धुं विहाय श्रीहैः पदम् ॥ 10 ॥

Last of all, through Bhāratī's curse and by the command of Śrī Hari, she turned into the Tulasi trees, purifying the whole world. Remaining for five thousand years of Kali, all of them will quite their river appearances and go back to Hari.

यानि सर्वाणि तीर्थानि कारीयोद्धावनं विना ।

यास्यति सार्थ्त पौधिक्य दैकुणतमात्रा हरेः ॥ १ १ ॥

शाल्याम: शक्तिश्वी जगाधध्य भात्मा ।

कलैदंगसहचते त्यक्त्वा वांति निजं पद् ॥ १ २ ॥

By the command of Śri Hari, all the Tirthas save Kāśī and Vrndāvana will go along with them to Vaikunjtha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand years of Kali, Śalāgrāma Śilā (the stone piece worshipped as Nārāyaṇa) Śiva, and Śiva Śakti and Puruṣottama Jagannātha will leave the soil of Bhārata and go to their respective places, (i.e., the Māhātmayas of these will be extinct from Bhārata).

साध्वश्र पुराणानि शंखानि श्राद्रतपो ।

वेदोक्तानि च कर्माणि ययुसैः साध्वीये च ॥ 13 ॥

देवयुजा देवनाम तक्लितिगुणक्लोर्निम ।

वेदोर्भानि च शाखानी ययुसैः साध्वीये च ॥ 14 ॥

There will then case to be the saints (of Śiva Śakta, Gānapatya and Vaiṣṇava sects, (eighteen) Purāṇas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious sings), Śrāddhas, Tarpanas, and all the rites and

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with their Angas will no longer be heard of. All these will disappear with them.

संतछ सत्यधर्मंु वेटाङ्ग प्रामदेवता: ।।

जतं तपशाननं वयुस्तैः साधमेव च ।। १५ ।।

वायावारतता: सर्वे मिथ्याकपटसंयुता: ।

तुलसीरिता पूजा भविष्यति ततः परम् ।। १६ ।।

The assembly of the Sâdhus, the true Dharma, the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devís, the Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to the Vâmācāra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tântrik form of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.)

शठा: कृत्त दाँधिकाठ्य महाईकारस्येतृतः ।

चोराश्र हिंसकाः सर्वे पशिव्यिति ततः परम् ॥ 17 ॥

पुंसे घेदः स्तीविघते विवाहो वासपि निर्भयः ।

स्ववामिभेदो वस्तूनां पशिव्यति ततः परम् ॥ 18 ॥

They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If any body worships, his worship will be void of Tulasi leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be at variance with one another; women will be at variance with one another; no fear will exist in marriage ties.

सर्वे क्रीवारणाः पुंस: पुंशल्यश्र गृहे गृहे ।

तर्नैभैर्नसैन: शग्रवत्थामित ताद्ययैत च ।। १९ ॥

गृहेश्वरी न गृहिणी गृही भृत्याधिकोर्धमः ।

Properties will be only of those that will make them (i.e., there will cease to be any inheritance from father to son and so forth). Husbands will be obedient to their wives; unchaste women will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole mistresses of houses and husbands will stand before them as servants with folded palms.

चेटीदासमणो बधा: शव्यूश्र शव्यूग्रस्वा || 20 ||

कतारी बलिनो गेहे योगिसंबंधिधायाः ।

विद्यासंबंधिधिध: सार्थं संभाषायि न विहते ॥ 21 ॥

तबाउपरिचिता लोकासल्या पुंसघ बाँधवाः ।

सर्वकर्माक्षम: पुंसो योषितामात्रया विहा ॥ 22 ॥

Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers of the household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one's class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters of the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers. Without te command of the housewives, the masters of the houses will be unable to do anything.

बह्रास्त्रविश्र: शूत्रा जात्याचारविवर्षिताः ।

संख्या च यत्रामूत्र च भवेल्लुप्त न संयशः ॥ 23 ॥

मेल्छाचारा भाविध्यिते वर्णांश्वार एव च ।

मेल्णशालये पहिध्यिते स्वाशास्त्री विहाय च ॥ 24 ॥

The divisions of caste (Brāhmana, Kṣattriya, Vaīśya, and Śūdra) will entirely disappear. Far from practising Sandhyā Vandanam and other daily practices, the Brāhmanas will cease to hold the holy threads even on their bodies. The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the Mleechas, read the Śāstras of the Mleechas and forsake their own Śāstras.

ब्रह्मब्रविश शंरा: श्रूजागां सेवका: कलौ ।

सुपकाता धावकाक्ष युचवाहाक्ष सर्वेशः ॥ 25 ॥

सत्यहीना जना: सर्वे सत्यहीना च मेदिति ।

फलहीनाक्ष तत्वोपत्यहीनाक्ष योषितः ॥ 26 ॥

The Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas will become the slaves of Śūdras, will become their cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any grains; trees will not yield any fruits and women will be isuseless.

क्षीरतीनास्तथा गाकः श्रीर सर्पिविजितम् ।

दंपती प्रीतिहीनी च गृहिण: सत्यवर्जितः ॥ 27 ॥

प्रतापहीना भृपाश प्रजाश करपीडिताः ।

जलहीना महान्यो दीर्घकाकंदरादयः ॥ 28 ॥

The cows will not yield milk; even if there be a little, milk, ghee will not come out of it. The affection between husband and wife will die out

Book IX Chapter VIII

and the families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any powers; the subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers, the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually have very little water in them.

पर्महीन: पुण्यहीना वर्णाधुसार एव च ।

लक्षेपु पुण्यवान्कोरि न तिहिति ततः परम् । २ ९ ॥

कृस्तिता विकृताकारा नरा नार्यंहा बालकाः ।

कुवार्ता कुस्तितः शब्दो भविष्यित ततः परम् ॥ ३० ॥

The Four Varṇas will be devoid of Dharma and Punya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous. Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys, all will be ugly and deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds.

कैचिद्यामाङ्ग नगर नरून्या भयानकाः ।

कैवित्वल्यकृतीयेग नेण च समाविताः ॥ 3 1 ॥

अरप्यानि भविष्येति प्रामेषु नगरेष च ।

अरप्यवासिनः सर्वे जनारच करपीक्षिताः ॥  32 ॥

Some villages and towns will be completely deserted by men and will look terrible; at some others few cottages with few inhabitants will be seen. Villages and town will be jungles and jungles will become filled with men. The inhabitants of the forests will become heavily taxed and disconsolate.

सस्त्रयिन च भविष्यंति तडागेषु नदीषु च ।

प्रकृष्टशेजरा हीना भविष्यंति कलो युने ॥ 33 ॥

अलौकवादिनो पूर्ति: शठाशास्यवादिनः ।

प्रकृतयिन च क्षेजाणि सस्यहीनानि नार्च ॥ 34 ॥

The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The Kulinas of high families will become very low The whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful cheasts and hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, will yield grains in name.

हीना: प्रकृष्ट धिन्नो देवभक्ताश्र नासिका: ।

हिसकाक्ष द्वशाहीना: पौराक्य नश्वातिन: ॥ 35 ॥

वामना व्याधियुक्ताश्र नार नार्येख सर्वतः ।

स्वल्यायुगो गदायुक्ता यौवने रहिता: कलै ॥ 36 ॥

Those who are well known as he millionaires,

they will become poor and those who are devoted to the Devas will be atheists. The towns folk will have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and envy their neighbours and turn out murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and females will be, everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived, and of very little youthful virility.

पलिता: पोडेशे वर्षे महापूज्धा विशगतो ।

अष्टवर्षा च युवती रजोयुक्ता च गर्भिणी ॥ 37 ॥

वस्तरांतप्रमृता स्त्री योडेशो च जरात्रिता ।

पतिपुत्रवती काविस्वां बंध्याः कली युगे ॥ 38 ॥

The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old when they become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some women will have their husbands and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless.

कन्यासिक्रियण: सर्वे वर्णाध्रतार एव च ।

मातृजावायूनां च जारोपेतात्रभक्षाः ।।  39 ॥

कन्यानां भपीनीनां वा जारोपातज्जीविनः ।

हरेर्नीन्तं विक्रियणो भविष्यितं कलो युगे ॥ ४० ॥

The four Varnas will sell their daughters. The paramours of the mothers, wives son's wives, daughters and sisters will be the source of support to them all. No one will be able, without money, to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari.

स्वयमुसूघ्र बानं च कांतिवर्धन्हिते ।

ततः पशुत्स्वतंच न स्वयमुल्लंचिधिति ॥ 41 ॥

देववृत्ति ब्रह्मृत्ति वृत्ति गुरुकुल्य च ।

स्वत्नां परदर्तां वा सर्वमूल्लंचिधिति ॥ 42 ॥

Persons will make gifts for name and fame and ultimately will take back what they had made as gifts. If there be any gifts made by one's own self or by one's forefathers for a Deva purpose or for Brāhmins or for the families of the Gurus, there will not be found wanting attempts to take back those gifts.

कन्यकामानिः: केचित्केचिच्च प्रवश्यानिः ।

केचिद्धूपामानिःः केचिद्धे सर्वेगानिःः ॥ 4 3 ॥

धर्मानीगामिनः केचित्सवनीमातुगामिनः ।

धातुजायागामिनश भविष्यंत कली युगे ॥ 4 4 ॥

अन्यायागमनं चैव कर्त्रियां गृहे गृहे ।

मातुयोर्नि परित्यज्य विहार्थिति सर्वतः ॥ 4 5 ॥

पत्नीना निणीयो नास्ति घनुर्णा च कलौं युग ।

प्रजानी चैव ग्रामाणां बस्तूनां च विशेषतः ॥ 4 6 ॥

Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in-law, some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the brother's wives. In every house, those who are unfit to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one's mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who is whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no surety that such a property belongs to such and such a man.

अतौकावादिन: सर्वे सर्वे चोरायु पतयः ।

परस्परं ईसकासुं सर्वे च नरयातिनः ॥ 47 ॥

ब्रह्मश्रविशण शेगा भविधिंति च पाचिनः ।

लक्षालोहरसाना च व्यापारं लवणस्य च ॥ 48 ॥

वृववाहा विवर्शेशः शुत्राणों शवदाहिनः ।

श्रूत्राभोधीनिः सर्वे सर्वे च वृषलीताः ॥ 49 ॥

All will turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other's wives, and murderers of men. In the houses of the Brāhmins, Kṣattiriyas, and Vaiśyas, the three higher castes, the current of sin will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited by the Śāstras. The Brāhmins will drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the Śūdras, eat the food of the Śūdras and go to unchaste women.

पढ़यज्विहौनाङ्ग कुटुराजी च भोजिनः ।

यज्सूरविहौनाङ्ग संयागैचविहौनाकः ॥ 50 ॥

पृंशली वारुध्वीजी कुटुनी च रजस्वला ।

विप्राणां रंधनागरे भविष्यति च पाचिका ॥ 51 ॥

There will be no more faith existing in the five Rsi Yajñas. Almost every Brāhmin will not observe the vows of Amāvasyā Niśipālena. The holy

threads will be cast away and the Sandhyā Vandanam and cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The unchaste women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the procureses during menstruation will cook in Brāhmin families.

अज्ञानां निवमो नासित योनीनां च विशेषतः ।

आग्रमाणां जानना च सर्वे पेलखा: कली युगे ॥ 52 ॥

एवं कली संप्रवृते सर्वे नेलछमयं भवेत् ।

हस्तप्रमाणे चृक्षे च अंग्रुहे चैव मानये ॥ 53 ॥

There will be no distinction of food, no distinction of wombs, no distinction of Śāramas, and no distinction of persons. All will turn out Mleechas. O Nārada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play, the whole world will be filled with Mleechas, the trees will be one hand high and the men will be of the size, of a thumb.

विप्रस्य विष्यायस: पुत्र: कल्कभंवित्यि ।

नारायणकलोश्व भगवान् बलिनां वर: ॥ 54 ॥

दीर्घिं करावालेन दीर्घोटकवाहनः ।

सेन्द्रष्टग्न्यां च पुरिवर्गे जितरोज कार्यिति ॥ 55 ॥

Then the most powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa will incarnate in His part in the house of a Brāhim named Viṣṇuajāś aś his son. Mounted on a long horse, holding a long sword He will make the world free of the Mlechas in three nights.

निर्मेच्छां बसुधां कृत्वा चोत्थानं कार्यिति ।

अराजका च वसुधा दस्युग्रता भयिषयिति ॥ 56 ॥

स्युगग्रामणा घडुगं वर्धेधारणतृता मही ।

लेकशुग्या वृक्ष्यान्या गृह्गान्या भयिषयिति ॥ 57 ॥

Then he will disappear from the face of the Earth and She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers. There will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and trees.

ततश्र द्वारशादित्या: कार्थ्वल्युदयं मुने ।

प्राप्नोति शुक्रतां पृथ्वी सभा तेषां च तेससा ॥ 58 ॥

कली गते च दुर्घर्य प्रमुने च कुत युगे ।

तपःसत्वसमायुक्तो धर्म: पूर्णों भविष्यति ॥ 59 ॥

Book IX Chapter VIII

After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their rays the whole water will be dried up and the earth will becomes level. Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come back, Tapasyā and the true religion and Sattva Guna will prevail again.

तपसिन्धि प्रथिति वेदता बाहाणा भृति ।

पतितन्ता प्रथिति योषितश गृहे गृहे ॥ 60 ॥

राजान: श्रविणा: सर्वे विघ्रभक्ता मन्स्विनः ।

प्रतपवर्ते धर्मिष्ठा: पुर्यकर्मततः सदा ॥ 61 ॥

The Brāhmins will practise Tapasyā, they will be devoted to Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in every house. Again the wise and intelligent Kṣattriyas devoted to the Brāhmaṇas will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion to the Dharma and love for good deeds will increase.

दैर्या वाणिज्यपित्त विष्णसन्त्र धार्मिकतः।

ग्रृग्रंश पुराणशीलाश्व धर्मिधि विग्रसेविनः ॥ 6 2 ॥

विश्रश्रजिशेगं संग्र हेवीभवितपरायणः ।

देवीमंत्रतः सर्वे देवीधानपरायणाः ॥ 6 3 ॥

The Vaiśyas will again go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the Brāhmins will be reestablished. The Śūdras, too, will be gain virtuous, and serve the Brāhmins. Again the Brāhmins Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas and their families will have Bhakti towards the Devi, be initiated in Devi Mantras and all will meditate on the Devi.

श्रुतिस्मृतिपुराणज्ञ: पुंमांसो स्रुतुपामिन: ।

लैगो नासिल हृष्यमर्य पूणों धर्म: कृते युगे ॥ 6 4 ॥

धर्मक्षिपाच्च नेतायां द्विपाच्च द्वागरे ततः ।

कलौ वृतं चैकपाच्च सर्वलुस्तिततः परम् ॥ 6 5 ॥

Again there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the Smṛtis, and the Purāṇas, all will go to their wives in menstruation periods. No Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will reign in full, with all the parts (Kalās) complete. When the Tretā Yuga comes, the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvāpara Yuga will come; the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will

begin, the Dharma will be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist, even in name. (O Nārada, Now I will speak of time.)

वारा: सप्त ताव यिषु तिवध: पोडण स्मृतः ।

तथा झाड्ग मासारच ऋतवरच चढ़ेच च ॥ 66 ॥

द्रे पक्षी चायने है च चतुर्धिः प्रहरैर्दिन् ।

चतुर्धिः प्रहैर गायिमासिर्शगर्दिन्सता ॥ 67 ॥

वर्षे पड़विध्ये जेयं कालल्याविधिमध्ये ।

यथा चायांगि यांचेल तथा शुगच्छायम् ॥ 68 ॥

The seven days of the week, Sunday, etc., the sixteen tithis, Pratipadā etc., the twelve months Vaiśākha etc., the six seasons Summer, etc., the two fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayanas (Northern and Southern) are rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, one night consists of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one so-called day. Thirty such days make one month. In the computation of time, five kinds of years (Varṣas) were already mentioned (in the 8th Skandha).

वर्षे पूर्णे नारणां च देवानां च दिवानिगम् ।

गतत्रये पह्वाधिके नरणां च युगे गते ॥ 69 ॥

देवानां च युगां जेयं कालसंख्याविदां मतम् ।

मन्त्रंतं तु दिव्यानां युगानाभेकस्पतति: ॥ 70 ॥

As the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali roll on turn by turn, so the days, months and years also roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas, is equal to one year, according to men; three hundred and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara.

मन्त्रतसमं जेयमापुर्थ च शर्षीपते: ।

अष्टाधिरजीमि चेन्द्र नते ब्रहादिवानिण्म ।। 71 ।।

अष्टोत्तरगते वर्षे गते पातक्ष बह्वणः ।

प्रलयः प्राकृतो जेयसत्वाद्धा वसुंधरा ॥ ७२ ॥

The life period of Indra, the Lord of Śacī, is one Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indra's lives equal to one day of Hiranyagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahmā. One hundred and eight such years equal to the life of one Brahmā. When this Brahmā dies, there is Prākrta Pralaya. The earth is not visible then. (The dissolution of Prakrī takes place.)

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

जलल्छुतानि विश्वानि ब्रहाविष्णुशिवादयः ।

ऋषयो ज्ञानिनः सर्वे लीनाः सत्ये चिद्यतमानि ॥ 7 3 ॥

तत्रेव प्रकृतिलिंना तत्र प्राकृतिको लय: ।

लयं प्राकृतिके जाते पते च बब्राणो मुने ॥ 7 4 ॥

The whole Brahmānda is deluged by water; Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other wise Rṣis get diluted in Para Brahma whose substance is all truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakṛti Devī, too, gets merged in Para Brahma. The fall of Brahmā and the dissolution of Prakṛti are called the Prākṛta Pralaya.

नियेमाग्रं कालछ श्रीद्व्या: प्रोच्यते मुने ।

एवं नर्यपिति सर्वाणि ब्रह्मात्यवितानि च ॥ ७ ७ ॥

नियोपतरकाले च पुनः सुहिकमेण च ।

एवं कतिथ्या सुहित्यः कतिथियोप्रिय च ॥ ७ ७ ॥

The duration of this Pralaya is one Nimesa of the Para Brahma Mūla Prakṛti united with Māyā. All the Brahmāṇdas (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this Nimeṣa expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and dissolution works are going on.

कति कल्या गता याता संख्या जानातिकः पुभान् ।

सुर्धीनां च लवानां च बह्जांतानां च नारत् ॥ 77 ॥

बहादादीनां च बह्जापड़े संख्या जानाति का: पुभान् ।

बह्जांतानां च सर्वेभाथीश्छीक एवं सः ॥ 78 ॥

So who can tell how many kalpas had past away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brahmāṇḍas were created or how many Brahmāṇḍas will be created. Who will be able to count how many Brahmās, how many Viṣṇus or how many Maeśvaras there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahma Paramesvara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless Brahmāṇḍas.

सर्वेघा परमात्या च सच्चिदानन्दलपथूक ।

ब्रहादायश तस्यांगस्तस्यांशि महाविराद् ॥ 79 ॥

तस्यांशि विराद् बृद्ध: सैवयं प्रकृति: परा ।

तस्या: सक्राणालसंजातो उपधर्नीधीश्रस्ततः ॥ 80 ॥

This Parameśvara of the nature of Existence,

Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All others, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara the Great Virāt, the Smaller Virāt, all are His parts. This Brahma is Mūlā Prakṛti and from That has appeared Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of his left half which is woman (Ardha Nārīśvara).

सैव कृष्णो द्विधाभृतो द्विषुजघ घतुर्भुजः ।

चतुर्णसुख बैकुंटे गोलोके द्विषुजः स्वयम् ॥ 8 1 ॥

बढ़ापदितुपपर्यतं सर्व प्राकृतिकं भवेत् ।

यद्यात्यक्तिले सूरं सर्व नश्यमेव च ॥ 82 ॥

It is She that divided Herself into two forms; in Her one form, She resides as the two armed Kṛṣṇa in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed Nārāyaṇa in Vaikunṭha. All the things from Brahmā, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are originated from Prakṛti. And all the Prakṛtborn things are transient.

एवंधितं सृष्टितुं सर्व नित्यं सनातनम् ।

सेवेच्छाययं परं बहुत निरुर्णं प्रकृतेः परम् ॥ 83 ॥

निरूपाधि निराकारं भवतानुग्रहकाततम् ।

क्रोतीत ब्रह्मा ब्राहोंं वक्तानात्कमलोद्यः ॥ 84 ॥

Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahma, beyond the thee gunas, the Source of all creation, Whose substance is All-Will is the Only Substance beyond the region of Prakṛti. He is without Upādhis (conditions, as time, space, causation and attributes); He is without any form; and the forms that He assumes, they are for shewing His Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahmā is able by His power of Knowledge to create the Brahmānda.

शिको मृत्युज्यक्षेय संहर्ता सर्वतत्वित् ।

यज्ञानाइय ततसा सर्वीश्रुत तपो महान् ॥ 85 ॥

महाविष्यतिवृक्तश सर्वतः सर्वदर्शनः ।

सर्वेल्यापी सर्वीनात प्रदाता सर्वसंपदाम् ॥ 86 ॥

It is by His Grace that Śiva, the Lord of the yogis is named Mṛtyunjāya (the Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all Tattvas. By His Tapas, Śiva has realised Para Brahma and therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing,

Book IX Chapter VIII

endowed with great Vibhūtis (lordly powres), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the bestower of all prosperities.

विष्यु: संवैक्षः श्रीमान्यद्रुतल्या यस्य सेवया ।

महामाया च प्रकृति: सर्वगतिकनियोशी ॥ ८ ७  ॥

सैव प्रोक्ता भगवती सचिवदानंद्रकपिणी ।

यज्ञानाध्यस्य तपसा यद्ध्रतल्या यस्य सेवया ॥ ८ ८ ॥

The devotion and service towards Para Brahma have alone made Śrī Viṣṇu the Lord of all; and it is through the power of Para Brahma, that Mahāmāyā Prakṛti Devī has become omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavati Durgā has got His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and has become Mūla Prakṛti of the nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss.

सावित्री देवमाता च वेदाधिष्ठातृदेवता ।

पूर्णा द्वितानां वेद्ना सप्तानाधस्य सेवना ॥ ८ ९ ॥

सर्वविद्धाधिवेदी सा पूर्णा च विद्यांगे पा ।

यलेवेया वत्पसा सर्वविवेषये पूर्तित ॥ ९० ॥

And so has the Devi Śāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas and She is worshipped by the Brāhmaṇas and the Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by the learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of worshipping the Prakṛti Devi.

सर्वश्रामाधिरेवी सा सर्वसम्यन्त्रदायिति ।

सर्वेश्वी सर्ववंहा सर्वैषां पुर्वादायिनि ॥ 91 ॥

सर्वस्तुता च सर्वज्ञा सर्वदुर्गार्तिनाथिनि ।

कृष्णवामांगरमंभृता कृष्णप्राणाधिदेवता ॥ 92 ॥

That Lakṣmī has become the bestower of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all is also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of Prakṛti that Durgā, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has appeared from the left side of Śrī Krṣṇa; and Rādhā has become the presiding Deity of His Prāna (vital airs), and She is worshipped by all and possessed of all knowledge.

कृष्णप्राणाधिका प्रेमा राधिका शक्तिसेवा ।

सर्वाधिकं च रूपं च सीभायरं मानगीरसे ॥ 93 ॥

कृष्णावक्षः-स्थलस्थानं पत्नीते प्रप सेवया ।

तपश्रकार सा पूर्वं शतन्युंगे च पवर्ते ॥ 94 ॥

विद्यवसहनं च पतिग्रापत्यधीये च ।

जाते शक्तिप्रासते तु दृष्टा चंद्रकलोपाम्प ॥ 95 ॥

It is by the worship of Sakti that Radhikā has so much excelled in love, has become the presiding Deity of the prāna of Krṣna. has got His love and respect, has been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful. With the object of getting Krṣna for her husband, She practised severe austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain Śataśrīnga in Bhārata to get the Mūla Prakti's Grace.

कृष्णावक्षःस्थले कृत्वा स्रोद कृयया विषुः ।

वरं तस्ये ददौ सारं सर्वभाभिप् दुलैभम् ॥ 96 ॥

मम वक्ष:स्थले तिष्ठ मम भक्ता च शाश्हति ।

सौभायने च मानेन प्रेणायो गौरोया च ॥ 97 ॥

त्वे मे श्रेष्ठा च ज्येष्ठा च प्रेपसी सर्वेयोचिताम् ।

वरिष्ठा च गरिष्ठा च संस्तुता पूर्तिता मया ॥ 98 ॥

सततं तव साध्योउं वंयश्छ प्राणावल्लभे ।

And when the Śakti Mūla Prakṛti became graciously pleased towards Her, Śri Kṛṣṇa seeing Rādhikā increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her highest boons so very rare to others and said: O Beautiful One! You better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongst all my wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, love and glory. From to-day you are my greatest best wife. I will love you as the best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to you and fulfil what you say.

इच्छुतत्वा च जगत्रायधकार ललनों ततः ॥ 99 ॥

सप्लौरित्हितां तां च चकार प्राणावलल्याम् ।

अन्या या याशु ता देल्य:पुजिता: गशिलेविया ॥ 100 ॥

तस्मतु यात्रुशं यासां तातृकामुकर्त मुने ।

दिछ्यं वर्षेसहर्षे च तपतत्वा हिमाघतवे ॥ 101 ॥



Thus saying, Śrī Krṣṇa selected her as his wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to His Heart. The other Deviś besides the five Prakṛtis, already mentioned, also derived superiorities by serving Mūla Prakṛti. O Muni! What shall I say, everyone reaps the fruits as the practises Tapasyā. 

दूरां च तत्वदं ध्यात्या सर्वपूज्या बम्बूद्र है । 
सरस्वती तत्स्तवा पवैते गंधामदाने ॥ 102 ॥ 
लक्षवर्यं च दिव्यं च सर्ववंद्या बम्बूर सा । 
लक्ष्मीयुगित्रा दिव्यं तत्स्तवता च पुकते ॥ 103 ॥ सर्वसंपत्पूद्रात्रीं च जाता देवीनिषेवणात् ।

Bhagavati Durgā practised on the Himālyās tapasyā for one thousand Deva years and meditated on the lotus-fect of Mūla Prakṛti and so has come to be worshipped by all. The Devi Sarasvatī practised tapasyā for one Iākh Deva years and is come to be respected by all. The Devi Lakṣmī practised tapasyā at Puškara for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by the Grace of Mūla Prakṛti, has become the bestower of wealth to all.

साविर्मी मल्ले तत्वा पूज्या वंधा बथुपद सा ॥ 104 ॥

पहिवर्षसहर्ष च दिव्यं ध्यत्वा च ततवद् ।

शतमन्यन्तं तपं शंकरेण पुरा विषो ॥ 105 ॥

शतमन्यन्तं चेदे बह्वा शक्ति जजाप दू ।

शतमन्यन्तं विद्युस्तत्वा पाता बघृह् ॥ 106 ॥

The Devi Savitri worshipped Śakti for sixty thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara worshipped Śakti

for one hundred Manvantaras and so have become the Preservers, etc., of this world.

दूगमन्तंतर तत्वा श्रीकृष्ण: परमं तप: ।

गोलोकं प्रावतावित्य्वं मोदते३तावि यत्र हि ॥ 107 ॥

दूगमन्तंतर धर्मतत्वा वै भक्तिसंगुतः ।

सर्वप्रण: सर्वधातो कंचुपृस: ॥ 108 ॥

Śrī Kṛṣṇa practised for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and therefore obtained his position in the region of Goloka and is remaining there to-day in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped Śakti with devotion for ten Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped by all, and the receptacle of all.

एवं देल्याक्रु तपासा सर्वे देवाक्रु पूर्तिनः ।

मुज्चो मन्तवो भूषण ब्राह्मणश्रैय पूर्तिनः ॥ 109 ॥

एवं ते कक्षितं सर्वे पुराणं सर्वथाममम् ।

मुख्वक्रवाध्या ज्ञात किं भूयः श्रीत्थिच्छसि ॥ 110 ॥

इति श्रीभद्रैकीभागवते नवमस्कन्धे शक्तिजुपार्थे

नारदनारायणर्वावंदेरुभो३स्थाय: 11 8 11

O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devís, Devas, Munis, Kings, Brāhmanas, all have got their respect in this world by the worship of Sakti. O Devarsī! I have thus described to you all that I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of the Vedas. What more do you want to hear?

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the greatness of Kali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Šrimaddevībhāgavatam

