[Ch 8 Verse 1-2]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārānyaa said: A part of Sarasvatī descended in this Bhārata Punya Bhūmi (land of merits), owing to the curse of Gāngā; and She remained in full in Viṣṇu's region, the abode of Vaikunṭha. She is named Bhāratī, on account of Her coming to Bhārata; she is called Brāhmī because she is dear to Brahmā; and She is called Vānī as She presides over Speech.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- A part of Sarasvatī descended in this Bhārata Puṇya Bhūmi (land of merits), owing to the curse of Gaṅgā; and She remained in full in Viṣṇu’s region, the abode of Vaikuṇṭha. She is named Bhāratī, on account of Her coming to Bhārata; she is called Brāhmī because she is dear to Brahmā; and She is called Vānī as She presides over Speech.

[Ch 8 Verse 3-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hari is seen everywhere, in tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He resides in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvān. Vānī is the Śakti of that Sarasvān; therefore She is denominated Sarasvatī. The river Sarasvatī is a very sacred Tīrtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of sins, of sinners.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hari is seen everywhere, in tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He resides in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvān. Vānī is the Śakti of that Sarasvān; therefore She is denominated Sarasvatī. The river Sarasvatī is a very sacred Tīrtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of sins, of sinners.

[Ch 8 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Through the curse of Sarasvatī, the Devi Gāngā also assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought down to this earth at the request of Bhagiratha Hence she is called Bhāgirathi. While Gāngā was rushing down to the earth Śiva capable to bear the great rush of Her, held Her on His head at the request of the Mother Earth.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Through the curse of Sarasvatī, the Devī Gaṅgā also assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought down to this earth at the request of Bhagīratha. Hence she is called Bhāgirathī. While Gaṅgā was rushing down to the earth Śiva capable to bear the great rush of Her, held Her on His head at the request of the Mother Earth.

[Ch 8 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Lakṣmī also, through the curse of Sarasvatī came in part of parts to Bhārata as the river Padmāvatī. But She remained in full with Hari. Lakṣmī appeared also in, Her other part as the well-known daughter Tulasī of the king Dharmadhvaja in India.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Lakṣmī also, through the curse of Sarasvatī came in part of parts Bhārata as the river Padmāvatī. But She remained in full with Hari. Lakṣmī appeared also in Her other part as the well-known daughter Tulasī of the king Dharmadhvaja in India.

[Ch 8 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Last of all, through Bhāratī's curse and by the command of Śrī Hari, she turned into the Tulasi trees, purifying the whole world. Remaining for five thousand years of Kali, all of them will quite their river appearances and go back to Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Last of all, through Bhāratī’s curse and by the command of Śrī Hari, she turned into the Tulasī tree, purifying the whole world. Remaining for five thousand years of Kali, all them will quit their river appearances and go back to Hari.

[Ch 8 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► By the command of Śri Hari, all the Tirthas save Kāśī and Vrndāvana will go along with them to Vaikunjtha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand years of Kali, Śalāgrāma Śilā (the stone piece worshipped as Nārāyaṇa) Śiva, and Śiva Śakti and Puruṣottama Jagannātha will leave the soil of Bhārata and go to their respective places, (i.e., the Māhātmayas of these will be extinct from Bhārata).
NEW CORR ENG ──► By the command of Śrī Hari, all the Tīrthas save Kāsī and Bindrāban will go along with them to Vaikuṇṭha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand years of Kali, Śālagrāma Śilā (the stone piece worshipped as Nārāyaṇa) Śiva, and Śiva Śakti and Puruṣottama Jagannātha will leave the soil of Bhārata and go to their respective places, (i.e. the Māhātmyas of those will be extinct from Bhārata).

[Ch 8 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There will then case to be the saints (of Śiva Śakta, Gānapatya and Vaiṣṇava sects, (eighteen) Purāṇas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious sings), Śrāddhas, Tarpanas, and all the rites and ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with their Angas will no longer be heard of. All these will disappear with them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There will then cease to be the saints of Śiva Śākta, Gāṇapatya and Vaiṣṇava sects, (eighteen) Purāṇas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious signs), Śrāddhas, Tarpaṇas, and all the rites and ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with their Amgas will no longer be heard of. All these will disappear with them.

[Ch 8 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The assembly of the Sâdhus, the true Dharma, the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devís, the Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to the Vâmācāra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tântrik form of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► The assembly of the Sādhus, the true Dharma, the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devīs, the Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to the Vāmācāra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tāntrik form of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.)

[Ch 8 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If any body worships, his worship will be void of Tulasi leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be at variance with one another; women will be at variance with one another; no fear will exist in marriage ties.
NEW CORR ENG ──► They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If anybody worships, his worship will be void of Tulasī leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, vain, egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be at variance with one another; women will be at variance with one another; no fear will exist in marriage ties.

[Ch 8 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Properties will be only of those that will make them (i.e., there will cease to be any inheritance from father to son and so forth). Husbands will be obedient to their wives; unchaste women will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole mistresses of houses and husbands will stand before them as servants with folded palms.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Properties will be only of those that will make them (i. e. there will cease to be any inheritance from father to son and so forth ). Husbands will be obedient to their wives; unchaste women will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole mistresses of houses and husbands will stand before them as servants with folded palms.

[Ch 8 Verse 20-22]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers of the household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one's class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters of the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers. Without te command of the housewives, the masters of the houses will be unable to do anything.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers of the household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one’s own class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters of the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers. Without the command of the house-wives, the masters of the houses will be unable to do anything.

[Ch 8 Verse 23-24]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The divisions of caste (Brāhmana, Kṣattriya, Vaīśya, and Śūdra) will entirely disappear. Far from practising Sandhyā Vandanam and other daily practices, the Brāhmanas will cease to hold the holy threads even on their bodies. The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the Mleechas, read the Śāstras of the Mleechas and forsake their own Śāstras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The divisions of caste (Brāhmaṇā, Kṣattriya, Vaiṣya, and Śūdra) will entirely disappear. Far from practising Sandhyā Bandanam and other daily practices, the Brāhmaṇas will cease to hold the holy threads even on their bodies. The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the Mleccas, read the Śāstras of the Mleccas and forsake their own Śāstras.

[Ch 8 Verse 25-26]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas will become the slaves of Śūdras, will become their cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any grains; trees will not yield any fruits and women will be isuseless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas will become the slaves of Śūdras, will become their cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any grains; trees will not yield any fruits and women will be issueless.

[Ch 8 Verse 27-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The cows will not yield milk; even if there be a little, milk, ghee will not come out of it. The affection between husband and wife will die out and the families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any powers; the subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers, the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually have very little water in them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The cows will not yield milk; even if there be a little milk, ghee will not come out of it. The affection between husband and wife will die out and the families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any power; the subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers, the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually have very little water in them.

[Ch 8 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Four Varṇas will be devoid of Dharma and Punya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous. Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys, all will be ugly and deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Four Varṇas will be devoid of Dharma and Puṇya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous. Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys, all will be ugly and deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds.

[Ch 8 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some villages and towns will be completely deserted by men and will look terrible; at some others few cottages with few inhabitants will be seen. Villages and town will be jungles and jungles will become filled with men. The inhabitants of the forests will become heavily taxed and disconsolate.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some villages and towns will be completely deserted by men and will look terrible; at some others few cottages with few inhabitants will be seen. Villages and towns will be jungles and jungles will become filled with men. The inhabitants of the forests will become heavily taxed and disconsolate.

[Ch 8 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The Kulinas of high families will become very low The whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful cheasts and hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, will yield grains in name.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The Kulīnas of high families will become very low. The whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful cheats and hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, will yield grains in name.

[Ch 8 Verse 35-36]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Those who are well known as he millionaires, they will become poor and those who are devoted to the Devas will be atheists. The towns folk will have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and envy their neighbours and turn out murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and females will be, everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived, and of very little youthful virility.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Those who are well known as the millionaires, they will become poor and those who are devoted to the Devas will be atheists. The towns folk will have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and envy their neighbours and turn out murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and females will be everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived, and of very little youthful virility.

[Ch 8 Verse 37-38]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old when they become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some women will have their husbands and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old when they become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some women will have their husbands and children living. Otherwise almost all will be barren, childless. The

[Ch 8 Verse 39-40]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The four Varnas will sell their daughters. The paramours of the mothers, wives son's wives, daughters and sisters will be the source of support to them all. No one will be able, without money, to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari.
NEW CORR ENG ──► four Varṇas will sell their daughters. The paramours of the mothers, wives, son’s wives, daughters, and sisters will be the source of support to them all. No one will be able, without money, to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari.

[Ch 8 Verse 41-42]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Persons will make gifts for name and fame and ultimately will take back what they had made as gifts. If there be any gifts made by one's own self or by one's forefathers for a Deva purpose or for Brāhmins or for the families of the Gurus, there will not be found wanting attempts to take back those gifts.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Persons will make gifts for name and fame and ultimately will take back what they had made as gifts. If there be any gifts made by one’s own self or by one’s forefathers or for a Deva purpose or for Brāhmins or for the families of the Gurus, there will not be found wanting attempts to take back those gifts.

[Ch 8 Verse 43-46]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in-law, some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the brother's wives. In every house, those who are unfit to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one's mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who is whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no surety that such a property belongs to such and such a man.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in-law, some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the brother’s wives. In every house, those who are unfit to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one’s mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who is whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no surety that such a property belongs to such and such a man.

[Ch 8 Verse 47-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► All will turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other's wives, and murderers of men. In the houses of the Brāhmins, Kṣattiriyas, and Vaiśyas, the three higher castes, the current of sin will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited by the Śāstras. The Brāhmins will drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the Śūdras, eat the food of the Śūdras and go to unchaste women.
NEW CORR ENG ──► All will turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other’s wives, and murderers of men. In the houses of the Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas, the three higher castes, the current of sin will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited by the Śāstras. The Brāhmins will drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the Śūdras, eat the food of the Śūdras and go to unchaste women.

[Ch 8 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There will be no more faith existing in the five Rsi Yajñas. Almost every Brāhmin will not observe the vows of Amāvasyā Niśipālena. The holy threads will be cast away and the Sandhyā Vandanam and cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The unchaste women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the procureses during menstruation will cook in Brāhmin families.
NEW CORR ENG ──► There will be no more faith existing in the five Ṛṣi Yajñas. Almost every Brāhmin will not observe the vows of Amāvasyā Niśipālana. The holy threads will be cast away and the Sandhyā Bandanam and cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The unchaste women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the procuresses during menstruation will cook in Brāhmin families.

[Ch 8 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► There will be no distinction of food, no distinction of wombs, no distinction of Śāramas, and no distinction of persons. All will turn out Mleechas. O Nārada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play, the whole world will be filled with Mleechas, the trees will be one hand high and the men will be of the size, of a thumb.
NEW CORR ENG ──► and no distinction of persons. All will turn out Mleccas. O Nārada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play, the whole world will be filled with Mleccas, the trees will be one hand high and the men will be of the size of a thumb.

[Ch 8 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then the most powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa will incarnate in His part in the house of a Brāhim named Viṣṇuajāś aś his son. Mounted on a long horse, holding a long sword He will make the world free of the Mlechas in three nights.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then the most powerful Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa will incarnate in His part in the house of a Brāhmin named Viṣṇujaśā as his son. Mounted on a long horse, holding a long sword He will make the world free of the Mleccas in three nights.

[Ch 8 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then he will disappear from the face of the Earth and She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers. There will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and trees.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then he will disappear from the face of the Earth and She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers. There will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and trees.

[Ch 8 Verse 58-59]
OLD OCR ENG ──► After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their rays the whole water will be dried up and the earth will becomes level. Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come back, Tapasyā and the true religion and Sattva Guna will prevail again.
NEW CORR ENG ──► After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their rays the whole water will be dried up and the earth will become level. Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come back, Tapasyā and the true religion and Sattva Guṇa will prevail again.

[Ch 8 Verse 60-61]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Brāhmins will practise Tapasyā, they will be devoted to Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in every house. Again the wise and intelligent Kṣattriyas devoted to the Brāhmaṇas will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion to the Dharma and love for good deeds will increase.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Brāhmins will practise Tapasyā, they will be devoted to Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in every house. Again the wise and intelligent Kṣattriyas devoted to the Brāhmaṇas will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion to Dharma and love for good deeds will increase.

[Ch 8 Verse 62-63]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Vaiśyas will again go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the Brāhmins will be reestablished. The Śūdras, too, will be gain virtuous, and serve the Brāhmins. Again the Brāhmins Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas and their families will have Bhakti towards the Devi, be initiated in Devi Mantras and all will meditate on the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Vaiśyas will again go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the Brāhmins will be reestablished. The Śūdras, too, will be again virtuous, and serve the Brāhmins. Again the Brāhmins, Kṣattriyas, and Vaiśyas and their families will have Bhakti towards the Devī, be initiated in Devī Mantras and all will meditate on the Devī.

[Ch 8 Verse 64-65]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Again there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the Smṛtis, and the Purāṇas, all will go to their wives in menstruation periods. No Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will reign in full, with all the parts (Kalās) complete. When the Tretā Yuga comes, the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvāpara Yuga will come; the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will begin, the Dharma will be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist, even in name. (O Nārada, Now I will speak of time.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► Again there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the Smritis, and the Purāṇas, all will go to their wives in menstruation periods. No Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will reign in full, with all the parts (Kalās) complete. When the Tretā Yuga comes, the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvāpara Yuga will come; the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will begin, the Dharma will be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist, even in name. (O Nārada! Now I will speak of time.)

[Ch 8 Verse 66-68]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The seven days of the week, Sunday, etc., the sixteen tithis, Pratipadā etc., the twelve months Vaiśākha etc., the six seasons Summer, etc., the two fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayanas (Northern and Southern) are rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, one night consists of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one so-called day. Thirty such days make one month. In the computation of time, five kinds of years (Varṣas) were already mentioned (in the 8th Skandha).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The seven days of the week, Sunday, &c., the sixteen tithis, Pratipada &c., the twelve months Vaiśākha &c., the six seasons Summer, &c., the two fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayaṇas (Northern and Southern) are rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, one night consists of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one so-called day. Thirty such days make one month. In the computation of time, five kinds of years (Varṣas) were already mentioned (in the 8th Skandha).

[Ch 8 Verse 69-70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► As the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali roll on turn by turn, so the days, months and years also roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas, is equal to one year, according to men; three hundred and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara.
NEW CORR ENG ──► As the Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali roll on turn by turn, so the days, months and years also roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas, is equal to one year, according to men; three hundred and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara.

[Ch 8 Verse 71-72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The life period of Indra, the Lord of Śacī, is one Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indra's lives equal to one day of Hiranyagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahmā. One hundred and eight such years equal to the life of one Brahmā. When this Brahmā dies, there is Prākrta Pralaya. The earth is not visible then. (The dissolution of Prakrī takes place.)
NEW CORR ENG ──► The life period of Indra, the Lord of Śacī, is one Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indraś lives equal to one day of Hiraṇyagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahmā. One hundred and eight such years equal to the life of one Brahmā. When this Brahmā dies, there is the Prākrita Pralaya. The earth is not visible then. (The dissolution of Prakriti takes place.)

[Ch 8 Verse 73-74]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The whole Brahmānda is deluged by water; Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other wise Rṣis get diluted in Para Brahma whose substance is all truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakṛti Devī, too, gets merged in Para Brahma. The fall of Brahmā and the dissolution of Prakṛti are called the Prākṛta Pralaya.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The whole Brāhmaṇḍa is deluged by water; Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara and the other wise Ṛṣis get diluted in Para Brahmā whose substance is all truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakriti Devī, too, gets merged in Para Brahmā. The fall of Brahmā and the dissolution of Prakriti are called the Prākrita Pralaya.

[Ch 8 Verse 75-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The duration of this Pralaya is one Nimesa of the Para Brahma Mūla Prakṛti united with Māyā. All the Brahmāṇdas (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this Nimeṣa expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and dissolution works are going on.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The duration of this Pralaya is one Nimeṣa of the Para Brahmā Mūla Prakriti united with Māyā. All the Brāhmaṇḍas (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this Nimeṣa expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and dissolution work are going on.

[Ch 8 Verse 78]
OLD OCR ENG ──► So who can tell how many kalpas had past away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brahmāṇḍas were created or how many Brahmāṇḍas will be created. Who will be able to count how many Brahmās, how many Viṣṇus or how many Maeśvaras there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahma Paramesvara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless Brahmāṇḍas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► So who can tell how many kalpas had past away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brāhmaṇḍas were created or how many Brāhmaṇḍas will be created. Who will be able to count how many Brahmās, how many Viṣṇus or how many Maheśvaras there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahmā Parameśvara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless Brāhmaṇḍas.

[Ch 8 Verse 79-80]
OLD OCR ENG ──► This Parameśvara of the nature of Existence, Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All others, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara the Great Virāt, the Smaller Virāt, all are His parts. This Brahma is Mūlā Prakṛti and from That has appeared Śrī Krṣṇa, the Lord of his left half which is woman (Ardha Nārīśvara).
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Parameśvara of the nature of Existence, Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All others, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara the Great Virāṭ, the Smaller Virāṭ, all are His parts. This Brahmā is Mūlā Prakriti and from That has appeared Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of his left half which is woman (Ardha Nārīśvara).

[Ch 8 Verse 81-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is She that divided Herself into two forms; in Her one form, She resides as the two armed Kṛṣṇa in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed Nārāyaṇa in Vaikunṭha. All the things from Brahmā, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are originated from Prakṛti. And all the Prakṛtborn things are transient.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is She that divided Herself into two forms; in Her one form, She resides as the two armed Kṛṣṇa in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha. All the things from Brahmā, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are originated from Prakriti. And all the Prakriti-born things are transient.

[Ch 8 Verse 83-84]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahma, beyond the thee gunas, the Source of all creation, Whose substance is All-Will is the Only Substance beyond the region of Prakṛti. He is without Upādhis (conditions, as time, space, causation and attributes); He is without any form; and the forms that He assumes, they are for shewing His Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahmā is able by His power of Knowledge to create the Brahmānda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahmā, beyond the three guṇas, the Source of all creation, Whose substance is All-Will is the Only Substance beyond the region of Prakriti. He is without Upādhis (conditions, as time, space, causation and attributes); He is without any form; and the forms that He assumes, they are for shewing His Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahmā is able by His Power of Knowledge to create the Brāhmaṇḍa.

[Ch 8 Verse 85-86]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is by His Grace that Śiva, the Lord of the yogis is named Mṛtyunjāya (the Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all Tattvas. By His Tapas, Śiva has realised Para Brahma and therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing, endowed with great Vibhūtis (lordly powres), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the bestower of all prosperities.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is by His Grace that Śiva, the Lord of the yogis is named Mrityumjaya (the Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all Tattvas. By His Tapas, Śiva has realised Para Brahmā and therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing, endowed with great Vibhūtis (lordly powers), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the bestower of all prosperities.

[Ch 8 Verse 87-88]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The devotion and service towards Para Brahma have alone made Śrī Viṣṇu the Lord of all; and it is through the power of Para Brahma, that Mahāmāyā Prakṛti Devī has become omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavati Durgā has got His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and has become Mūla Prakṛti of the nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The devotion and service towards Para Brahmā have alone made Śrī Viṣṇu the Lord of all; and it is through the power of Para Brahmā, that Mahāmāyā Prakriti Devī has become omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavatī Durgā has got His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and has become Mūla Prakriti of the nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss.

[Ch 8 Verse 89-90]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And so has the Devi Śāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas and She is worshipped by the Brāhmaṇas and the Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by the learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of worshipping the Prakṛti Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And so has the Devī Sāvitrī, the Mother of the Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas and She is worshipped by the Brāhmaṇas and the Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by all the learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of worshipping the Prakriti Devī.

[Ch 8 Verse 91-92]
OLD OCR ENG ──► That Lakṣmī has become the bestower of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all is also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of Prakṛti that Durgā, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has appeared from the left side of Śrī Krṣṇa; and Rādhā has become the presiding Deity of His Prāna (vital airs), and She is worshipped by all and possessed of all knowledge.
NEW CORR ENG ──► That Lakṣmī has become the bestower of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all is also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of Prakriti that Durgā, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has appeared from the left side of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; and Rādhā has become the presiding Deity of His Prāṇa (vital airs), and She is worshipped by all and possessed of all knowledge.

[Ch 8 Verse 93-95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is by the worship of Sakti that Radhikā has so much excelled in love, has become the presiding Deity of the prāna of Krṣna. has got His love and respect, has been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful. With the object of getting Krṣna for her husband, She practised severe austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain Śataśrīnga in Bhārata to get the Mūla Prakti's Grace.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is by the worship of Śakti that Rādhikā has so much excelled in love, has become the presiding Deity of the prāṇa of Kṛṣṇa, has got love and respect, has been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful. With the object of getting Kṛṣṇa for her husband, She practised severe austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain Śataśṛṅga in Bhārata to get the Mūla Prakriti’s Grace.

[Ch 8 Verse 96-98]
OLD OCR ENG ──► And when the Śakti Mūla Prakṛti became graciously pleased towards Her, Śri Kṛṣṇa seeing Rādhikā increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her highest boons so very rare to others and said: O Beautiful One! You better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongst all my wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, love and glory. From to-day you are my greatest best wife. I will love you as the best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to you and fulfil what you say.
NEW CORR ENG ──► And when the Śakti Mūla Prakriti became graciously pleased towards Her, Śrī Kṛṣṇa seeing Rādhikā increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her highest boons so very rare to others and said :-- O Beautiful One! You better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongs all my wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, love and glory. From today you are my greatest best wife. I will love you as the best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to you and fulfil what you say.

[Ch 8 Verse 99-101]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thus saying, Śrī Krṣṇa selected her as his wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to His Heart. The other Deviś besides the five Prakṛtis, already mentioned, also derived superiorities by serving Mūla Prakṛti. O Muni! What shall I say, everyone reaps the fruits as the practises Tapasyā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus saying, Śrī Kṛṣṇa selected her as his wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to His Heart. The other Devīs besides the five Prakritis, already mentioned, also derived superiorities by serving Mūla Prakriti. O Muni! What shall I say, everyone reaps the fruits as he practises Tapasyā.

[Ch 8 Verse 102-103]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Bhagavati Durgā practised on the Himālyās tapasyā for one thousand Deva years and meditated on the lotus-fect of Mūla Prakṛti and so has come to be worshipped by all. The Devi Sarasvatī practised tapasyā for one Iākh Deva years and is come to be respected by all. The Devi Lakṣmī practised tapasyā at Puškara for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by the Grace of Mūla Prakṛti, has become the bestower of wealth to all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Bhagavati Durgā practised on the Himālyās tapasyā for one thousand Deva years and meditated on the lotus-feet of Mūla Prakriti and so has come to be worshipped by all. The Devī Sarasvatī practised Tapasyā for one lakh Deva years and is come to be respected by all. The Devī Lakṣmī practised Tapasyā at Puṣkara for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by the Grace of Mūla Prakriti has become the bestower of wealth to all.

[Ch 8 Verse 104-106]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi Savitri worshipped Śakti for sixty thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara worshipped Śakti for one hundred Manvantaras and so have become the Preservers, etc., of this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī Savitrī worshipped Śakti for sixty thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara worshipped Śakti for one hundred Manvantaras and so have become the Preservers, etc., of this world.

[Ch 8 Verse 107-108]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Śrī Kṛṣṇa practised for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and therefore obtained his position in the region of Goloka and is remaining there to-day in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped Śakti with devotion for ten Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped by all, and the receptacle of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Śrī Kṛṣṇa practised for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and therefore obtained his position in the region of Goloka and is remaining there today in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped Śakti with devotion for ten Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped by all, and the receptacle of all.

[Ch 8 Verse 109-110]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devís, Devas, Munis, Kings, Brāhmanas, all have got their respect in this world by the worship of Sakti. O Devarsī! I have thus described to you all that I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of the Vedas. What more do you want to hear? Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the greatness of Kali in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Šrimaddevībhāgavatam
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devīs, Devas, Munis, Kings, Brāhmaṇas, all have got their respect in this world by the worship of Śakti. O Devarṣi! I have thus described to you all that I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of the Vedas. What more do you want to hear? Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Greatness of Kali in the Mahā Purāṇam Srīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
