[Ch 50 Verse 1-4]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Though you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of Samsāra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about t. m.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Though you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of Samsāra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about them.”

[Ch 50 Verse 5-6]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I am now describing the characters of Rādhā and Durgā, as described in the Vedas listen. I did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! I am now describing the characters of Rādhā and Durgā, as described in the Vedas; listen. I did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret.

[Ch 50 Verse 7-8]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Rādha presides over the Prāna and Durgā presides over the Buddhī. From these two, the Mūlāprakrti has originated this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Rādhā presides over the Prāṇa and Durgā presides over the Buddhi. From these two, the Mūlaprakriti has originated this world.

[Ch 50 Verse 9-10]
OLD OCR ENG ──► These two Šaktis guide the whole world. From the Mahāvirāt to the small insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mūlaprakṛti. One must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained. Therefore one ought to serve Mūlā Prakṛti for Her satisfaction.
NEW CORR ENG ──► These two Śaktis guide the whole world. From the Mahāvirāt to the small insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mūlaprakriti. One must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained. Therefore one ought to serve Mūla Prakriti for Her satisfaction.

[Ch 50 Verse 11-12]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Now of the two in Mūla Prakṛti, I will describe fully the Rādhā Mantra. Listen. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and others always worship this mantra. The principal mantra is ‘Śrī Rādhāyai Svāhā.’ By this six-lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mūla mantra Hrim be added, it yields gems and jewels as desired. So much so, if thousand koti mouths and one hundred koti tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Now of the two in Mūla Prakriti, I will describe fully the Rādhā Mantra. Listen. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and others always worship this mantra. The principal mantra is “Śrī Rādhāyai Svāhā.” By this six lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mūla mantra Hrīm be added, it yields gems and jewels as desired. So much so, if thousand koṭi mouths and one hundred koṭi tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described.

[Ch 50 Verse 13-14]
OLD OCR ENG ──► When the incorporeal voice of Mūla Prakṛti was heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Krṣṇa in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are played : (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Krṣṇa. Viṣṇu got the Mantra; from Viṣṇu, Brahmā got; from Brahmā Virāt got, from Virāt, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Rṣi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► When the incorporeal voice of Mūla Prakriti was heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Kṛṣṇa in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are played. (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu got the Mantra; from Viṣṇu, Brahmā got; from Brahmā Virāt got, from Virāt, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Ṛṣi.

[Ch 50 Verse 15-16]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always on the Mūlā Prakṛti with greatest joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of of Rādhā, never can the worship of Śri Krṣṇa be done. So men, devoted to Viṣṇu, should first of all worship Rādhā by all means. Rādhā is the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śri Krṣṇa. Hence Śri Krṣṇa is so much subject to Rādhā. The Lady of the Rāsa Māndalam remains always close to Him.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always on the Mūla Prakriti with greatest joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of Rādhā, never can the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa be done. So men, devoted to Viṣṇu, should first of all worship Rādhā by all means. Rādhā is the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Hence Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so much subject to Rādhā. The Lady of the Rāsa Maṇḍalam remains always close to Him.

[Ch 50 Verse 17-18]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Without Her Śrī Krṣṇa could not live even for a moment. The name Rādhā is derived from ‘Rādhnoti’ or fulfills all desires. Hence Mūlā Prakṛti is termed Rādhā. I am the Rṣi of all the mantras but the Durgā Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gāyatrī is the chanda (mantra) of those mantras and Rādhikā is the Devatā of them.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Without Her Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not live even for a moment. The name Rādhā is derived from “Rādhnoti” or fulfills all desires. Hence Mūla Prakriti is termed Rādhā. I am the Ṛṣi of all the mantras but the Durgā Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gāyatrī is the chanda (mantra) of those mantras and Rādhikā is the Devatā of them.

[Ch 50 Verse 19]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Really, Nārāyaṇa is the Rṣi of all the mantras; Gāyatrī is the chanda; Pranava (om) is the Bija (seed) and Bhuvaneśvarī (the Directrix of the world) is the Śakti. First of all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devi Rādhikā, the Śakti of the Rāsa is to be done, as mentioned in the Sāma Veda.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Really, Nārāyaṇa is the Ṛṣi of all the mantras; Gāyatrī is the chanda; Prāṇava (om) is the Vīja (seed) and Bhuvaneśvarī (the Directrix of the world) is the Śakti. First of all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devī Rādhikā, the Śakti of the Ṛṣis is to be done, as mentioned in the Sāma Veda.

[Ch 50 Verse 20-25]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The meditation of Rádhā is as follows: “O Devi Rádhike! Thy colour is like white Campaka flowers; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Mon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba frutis, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kānci) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles. Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments; Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śrīgāra (love sentiments). Thou art ever ready to shew Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikā and Mālati are shining; Thy body is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle of Rāsa Maṇḍalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons and another hand expresses ‘Have no fear.’
NEW CORR ENG ──► The meditation of Rādhā is as follows :-- O Devī Radhike! Thy colour is like white Champaka flower; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Moon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba fruits, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kāñcī) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles; Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments! Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śriṅgāra (love sentiments.) Thou art ever ready to show Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikā and Mālatī are shining; Thy body is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle of Rāsa Maṇḍalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons and another hand expresses “Have no fear.”

[Ch 50 Verse 26-28]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopikāś; Thou art dearer to Krṣna than even His life; O Parameśvarī! The Vedas reveal Thy nature." Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devi on a Śālāgramā stone, jar, yantra or the eight-petalled lotus and then worship Her duly.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopīkās; Thou art dearer to Kṛṣṇa than even His life; O Parame’svarī! The Vedas reveal Thy nature. Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devī on a Śālagrāma stone, jar, yantra or the eight petalled lotus and then worship Her duly.

[Ch 50 Verse 29-30]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First the Devi \( ^{1} \) is to be invoked; then Fādya and Āśana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Ācamanīyam water to be offered times on the face.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First the Devī is to be invoked; then Pādya and Āsana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Ācamanīyam water to be offered three times on the face.

[Ch 50 Verse 31-32]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing place where the Devi is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other ornaments are next to be given.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing place where the Devī is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other ornaments are next to be given.

[Ch 50 Verse 33-34]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Various garlands of flowers with Tulasi Mañjari (flower stalks) Parijāta flower and Śatapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of the Devi are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Various garlands of flowers with Tulasī Mañjari (flower stalks) Pārijāta flower and Satapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of the Devī are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch).

[Ch 50 Verse 35-37]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First of all, Mālāvatī on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devī, then Mādhavī on the south-east corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Suśilā on the south-west Saśikalā on the west, Pārījātā on the north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the benefactious Sundarī on the north-east corner are to be worshipped in order.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First of all, Mālāvatī on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devī, then Mādhavī on the southeast corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Suśīlā on the south-west, Saśikalā on the west, Pārijāta on the north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the benefactious Sundarī on the north-east corner are to be worshipped in order.

[Ch 50 Verse 38-39]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Outside this, Brāhmi and the other Mārṭkās are to be worshipped and on the Bhūpūras (the entrances of the yantra), the Regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas and weapons of the Devi, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped. Then all the attendant Deities of the Devi are to be worshipped with scents and various other articles.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Outside this, Brāhmī and the other Mātrikās are to be worshipped and on the Bhūpūras (the entrances of the yantra,) the Regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas and the weapons of the Devī, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped . Then all the attendant Deities of the Devī are to be worshipped with scents and various other articles.

[Ch 50 Verse 40-41]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou finishing the worship, one should chant the Stotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nāma (thousand names) Stotra with care and devotion. O Nārada! The intelligent man who worships thus the Rāseśvari Devi Rādhā, becomes like Viṣṇu and goes to the Go-loka.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thus finishing the worship, one should chant the Ṣtotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nāma (thousand names) Ṣtotra with care and devotion. O Nārada! The intelligent man who worships thus the Rāseśvarī Devī Rādhā, becomes like Viṣṇu and goes to the Goloka.

[Ch 50 Verse 42-43]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who performs the birth-day anniversary of Śrī Rādhā on the Full-Moon day of the month of Kārtika, gets the blessing of Śrī Rādhā who remains near to him. For some reason Rādhā, the dweller in Goloka was born in Vrndāvana as the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who performs the birthday anniversary of Śrī Rādhā on the Full-Moon day of the month of Kārtik, gets the blessings of Śrī Rādhā who remains near to him. For some reason Rādhā, the dweller in Goloka was born in Brindāban as the daughter of Vṛṣavānu.

[Ch 50 Verse 44]
OLD OCR ENG ──► However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, Puraścarapa is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of Puraścarapa, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be done with ghee, honey, and milk the three sweet mixed with Til and with devotion.
NEW CORR ENG ──► However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, Puraṣcaraṇa is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of Puraṣcaraṇa, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be done with ghee, honey, and milk; the three sweet things mixed with Til and with devotion.

[Ch 50 Verse 45]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārada said: O Bhagavan; Now describe the Stotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devi is pleased.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārada said :-- “O Bhagavān; Now describe the Ṣtotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devī is pleased.”

[Ch 50 Verse 46-47]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am saying the Rādhā Stotra. O Thou, the Highest Deity! the Dweller in Rāsa Mandalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rāsa Mandalam; O Thou dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His life even, I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas bow down before Thy lotus feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Now I am saying the Rādhā Ṣtotra. Listen. O Thou, the Highest Deity, the Dweller in Rāsa Maṇḍalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rāsa Maṇḍalam; O Thou dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His life even, I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas bow down before Thy lotus feet.

[Ch 50 Verse 48-49]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art Sarasvati; Thou art Sāvitri; Thou art Śaṅkari I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gāngā; Thou art Padmāvati; Thou art Saṣthi; Thou art Maṅgala Caṇḍikā; Thou art Manasā, Thou art Tulasi; Thou art Durgā; Thou art Bhagavati; Thou art Lakṣmī; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art Sarasvatī; Thou art Savitrī; Thou art Śaṅkarī; I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gaṅgā; Thou art Padmāvatī; Thou art Ṣaṣṭhī; Thou art Mangalā Caṇḍikā; Thou art Manasā; Thou art Tulasī; Thou art Durgā; Thou art Bhagavatī; Thou art Lakṣmī; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee.

[Ch 50 Verse 50-51]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art the Mūlā Prakṛti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obesiance to Thee! Be merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsāra (round of british and death).” O Nārada! Any body who remembers Rādhā and reads this Stotra three times a day does not feel the want of any thing in this world.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art the Mūla Prakriti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obeisance to Thee! Be merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsāra (round of birth and death). O Nārada! Anybody who remembers Rādhā and reads this Ṣtotra three times a day does not feel the want of anything in this world.

[Ch 50 Verse 52-53]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rāsa Manḍalam. O Child! This great secret aught never to be given out to any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durgā Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam. O Child This great secret ought never to be given out to any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durgā Devī.

[Ch 50 Verse 54-55]
OLD OCR ENG ──► It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgā. She is the object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful Śakti of Mahādeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of all.
NEW CORR ENG ──► It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgā. She is the object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful Śakti of Mahādeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of all.

[Ch 50 Verse 56-57]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Therefore She is named Durgā in the world. She is worshipped by all, whether a Śaiva or a Vaiṣnava. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti and from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe proceed. O Nārada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered Durgā Mantra, the best of all the Mantras.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Therefore She is named Durgā in the world. She is worshipped by all, whether a Śaiva or a Vaiṣṇava. She is the Mūla Prakriti and from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe proceed. O Nārada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered Durgā Mantra, the best of all the Mantras.

[Ch 50 Verse 58-60]
OLD OCR ENG ──► 'Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicee' is the nine lettered Bijā mantra of Śri Durgā; it is like a Kalpa Vṛksa yielding all desires. One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmā Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are the Rṣis of this mantra; Gāyatrī, Uṣnik and Anuṣṭubha are the chandas; Mahākālī, Mahā Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī are the Devatās; Rakta Dantikā, Durgā, and Bhrāmari are the Bijas.
NEW CORR ENG ──► “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” is the nine lettered Vīja mantra of Śrī Durgā; it is like a Kalpa Vrikṣa yielding all desires. One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are the Ṛṣis of this mantra; Gāyatrī, Uṣṇik and Anuṣṭhubha are the chandas; Mahākālī, Mahā Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī are the Devatās; Rakta Dantikā, Durgā, and Bhrāmarī are the Vījas.

[Ch 50 Verse 61-62]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Nandā, Śākambhari, and Bhimā are the Śaktis and Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Rṣi of the mantra (Nyāsa); assign the chandas to the mouth assign the Devatā to the heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Nandā, Sākambharī, and Bhīmā are the Śaktis and Dharma (Virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Ṛṣi of the mantra (Nyāsa); assign the chandas to the mouth and assign the Devatā to the heart.

[Ch 50 Verse 63-64]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then assign the Śakti to the right breast for the success and assign the Bija to the left breast. Then perform the Śadaṅga Nyāsa as follows: Aim Hrdayāya namah, Hrim Śirase Svāhā, Klim Śikhāyām Vaṣat, Cāmuṇḍāyai Kavacāya Hum, Vicec Netrābhyām Vauṣat, ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ Karatalaprṣṭhābhyām Phat. Next say touching the corresponding parts of the body: ‘Aim namah Śikhāyām, Hrim Namah’ on the right eye; ‘Klim Namah’ on the left eye, Cām Namah ‘on the right ear, ‘Mum namah’ on the left ear, nḍām Namah’ on the nostrils; Vim Namah on the face; ‘Ccem Namah’ on the anus and finally ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ on the whole body. Then do the meditation (dhyaña) thus:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then assign the Śakti to the right breast for the success and assign the Vīja to the left breast. Then perform the Ṣaḍamga Nyāsa as follows :-- Aim Hridayāya namah, Hrīm Śirase Svāhā, Klīm Śikhāyām Vaṣaṭ, Cāmuṇḍāyai Kavacāya Hum, Vicce Netrābhyām Vauṣaṭ, “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” Karatalapṛṣihābhyām Phaṭ. Next say touching the corresponding parts of the body :-- “Aim namah Śikhāyām, Hrīm Namah” on the right eye; “Klīm Namah” on the left eye, “Chām Namah” on the right ear, “Mum namah” on the left ear, ṇḍam Namah” on the nostrils; “Vim Namah” on the face; “Ccem Namah” on the anus and finally “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” on the whole body. Then do the meditation (dhyān) thus :--

[Ch 50 Verse 65-66]
OLD OCR ENG ──► ‘O Cāmundê! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons viz, Khadga (axe) Cakra (disc) Gadā (club) Bāna (arrows), Cāpa (bow), Parighā, Śūla (spear), Bhusūndī Kapāla, and Khadga. Thou art Mahā Kāli; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilānjana (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet.
NEW CORR ENG ──► meditation (dhyān) thus :-- “O Cāmuṇḍe! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons, viz., Khaḍga (axe), Cakra (disc), Gadā (club), Vāṇa (arrows), Cāpa (bow), Parigha, Sūla (spear), Bhūśuṇḍī Kapāla, and Khaḍga. Thou art Mahā Kālī; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilāñjan (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet.

[Ch 50 Verse 67-69]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Lotus born Brahmā chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha I bow down to Thee." Thus one should meditate on Mahā Kālī, of the nature of Kāmabija (the source whence will comes). Then the Dhyānam of Mahā Lakṣmī runs as follows: "O Mahā Laksmī, the destroyer of Mahisāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Aksa (a king of seed), Paraśu (a kind of axe), Gādā (club), Işu (arrows), Kuliśa (the thunderbolt) Padma (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kunḍikā (a student's waterpot, Kamandalu), Danda (rod for punishment), Śakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma (shield) Padma (a king of waterlily), Ghaṇā (bell), (Surāpātra) (a pot to hold liquor), Śula (pick-axe) Pāśa (noosc) and Sudarśana (a kind of weapon. Thy colour is of the Rising Sun.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Lotus born Brahmā chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha; I bow down to Thee.” Thus one should meditate on Mahā Kālī, of the nature of Kāmavīja (the source whence will comes). Then the Dhyānam of Mahā Laksmī runs as follows :-- O Mahā Lakṣmī, the destroyer of Mahiṣāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Akṣa (a kind of seed), Paraśu (a kind of axe), Gadā (club), Iṣu (arrows), Kuliśa (the thunderbolt) Padmā (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kuṇdikā (a student’s waterpot), Kamaṇdalu, Daṇḍa (rod for punishment), Śakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma (shield) Padmā (a kind of waterlily), Ghaṇṭā (bell,) Śurāpātra (a pot to hold liquor), Śūla (pickaxe), Pāśa (noose) and Sudarṣana (a kind of weapon). Thy colour is of the Rising Sun.

[Ch 50 Verse 70]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature Māyābija (the source whence female energy comes). So Obcisance to Thee! (The Bija and the Devi are one and identical).” Next comes the Dhyānan of Mahā Sarasvatī as follows:
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature Māyāvīja (the source whence female energy comes). So Obeisance to Thee! (The Vīja and the Devī are one and identical). Next comes the Dhyānam of Mahā Sarasvatī as follows :--

[Ch 50 Verse 71-72]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Mahā Sarasvatī! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conchshell, Musala (a kind of club), Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Kunda flower; Thou art the destroyer of Śumbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of Vānibja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes.
NEW CORR ENG ──► :-- O Mahā Sarasvatī! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conch shell, Muṣala (a kind of club), Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Kuṇḍa flower; Thou art the destroyer of Śumbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of Vāṇīvīja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes).

[Ch 50 Verse 73]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee!" O Nārada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahā Sarasvatī. Listen.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee! O Nārada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahā Sarasvatī. Listen.

[Ch 50 Verse 74-75]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the Sâlagrâma stone, or in the jar, or in image, or in the Vanalingam, or on the Sun, one should worship the Devi with oneness of heart.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the Śālagrāma stone, or in the jar, or in image, or in the Vāṇaliṅgam, or on the Sun, one should worship the Devī with oneness of heart.

[Ch 50 Verse 76-77]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then worship the Piṭha, the deities seated also on the dais, ॥.e., Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aghorā, Mangālā and other Pitha Śaktis. Then worship the attendant deities called Āvaraṇa Pūjā: Brahmā with Sarasvatī on the east, Ārāyaṇas with Lakṣmī on the Nairrit corner, Śankara with Pārvatī on the Vāyu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devi, and Mahāśura on the left side of the Devi; finally worship Mahisa (buffalo).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then worship the Pīṭha, the deities seated also on the dais, i.e., Jayā, Vījayā, Ajitā, Aghorā, Mangalā and other Pīṭha Śaktis. Then worship the attendant deities called Āvaraṇa Pūjā :-- Brahmā with Sarasvatī on the east, Nārāyaṇa with Lakṣmī on the Nairirit corner, Śaṅkara with Pārvatī on the Vāyu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devī, and Mahāsura on the left side of the Devī; finally worship Mahiṣa (buffalo).

[Ch 50 Verse 78-82]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next worship Nandajā, Raktadantā, Sākambhari, Śivā, Durgā, Bhimā, and Bhāramī. Then on the eight petals worship Brāhmī, Maheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaispavī, Vārāhī, Nāra Sīnīhī, Aindrī, and Cāmuṇḍā. Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devī, worship on the twenty-four leaves Viṣnu Māyā, Cetanā, Buddhi, Nidrā (sleep), hunger, a shadow, Šakti, thirst, peace, species (Jāti), modesty, faith, fame, Lakṣmī (wealth), fortitude, Vṛtti, Śruti memory, mercy, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi (nourishment), Bhrānti (error) and other Matṛkās.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next worship Nandajā, Raktadantā, Śakambharī, Śivā, Durgā, Bhīmā, and Bhrāmarī. Then on the eight petals worship Brahmā, Maheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī, Nāra Simhī, Aindrī, and Cāmuṇḍā. Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devī, worship on the twenty four leaves Viṣṇu Māyā, Cetanā, Buddhi, Nidrā (sleep), hunger, shadow, Śakti, thirst, peace, species (Jāti), modesty, faith, fame, Lakṣmī (wealth), fortitude, Vriti, Śruti, memory, mercy, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi (nourishment), Bhrānti (error) and other Mātrikās.

[Ch 50 Verse 83-85]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Next on the corners of the Bhūpura (gates of the Yantra), Ganesa Kṣetraṇālas, Vatuka and Yoginis are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Next on the corners of the Bhūpura (gates of the Yantra), Ganeśa Kṣettrapālas, Vaṭuka and Yoginīs are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings.

[Ch 50 Verse 86-87]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then Saptaśati stotra (Candī pātha) is to be repeated before the Devi. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgā, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude).
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then Saptaśati stitra (Caṇḍī pāṭha) is to be repeated before the Devī. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgā, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude).

[Ch 50 Verse 88-89]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devi Durgā. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmā, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogis full of knowledge, the Śāramīs, and Lakṣmī and the other Devas all meditate on Śivām.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devī Durgā. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmā, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogīs full of knowledge, the Āśramīs, and Lakṣmī and the other Devas all meditate on Śivānī.

[Ch 50 Verse 90-91]
OLD OCR ENG ──► One's birth is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgā. The fourteen Manus have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus feet of Durgā.
NEW CORR ENG ──► One’s birth is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgā. The fourteen Manus have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus feet of Durgā.

[Ch 50 Verse 92-93]
OLD OCR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the very hidden histories of the Five Praktrīs and their parts. Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa are obtained by hearing this.
NEW CORR ENG ──► O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the very hidden histories of the Five Prakritis and their parts. Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa are obtained by hearing this.

[Ch 50 Verse 94-95]
OLD OCR ENG ──► He who has no sons gets sons, who has no learning gets learning and whoever wants any thing gets that if he hears this. The Devi Jagaddhārī becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devi.
NEW CORR ENG ──► He who has no sons gets sons, who has no learning gets learning and whoever wants anything gets that if he hears this. The Devī Jagaddhātrī becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devī.

[Ch 50 Verse 96-97]
OLD OCR ENG ──► The Devi becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devi. To ascertain before-hand what offects, merits or demerits, would accure from reading this Bhāgavata, it is necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a Brāhmim child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs.
NEW CORR ENG ──► The Devī becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devī. To ascertain before-hand what effects, merits or demerits, would accrue from reading this Bhāgavata, it is necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a Brāhmin child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs.

[Ch 50 Verse 98-99]
OLD OCR ENG ──► First make a Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and again to the Devi Durgā. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the body.
NEW CORR ENG ──► First make a Saṅkalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and again to the Devī Durgā. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the body.

[Ch 50 Verse 100-101]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhagavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhagavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurānam Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from the curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhāgavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhāgavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

[Ch 50 Verse 101-103]
OLD OCR ENG ──► Here ends the Ninth Book. The Ninth Book Completed. Notes on Śakti and the Śāktas Extracts from the Calcutta Review. No. XLVII, March 1855. The Śāktas—Their characteristics and Practical influence in society. In the Mārkāndeya Purānam, Nature (Prakṛti) is said ‘to have assumed three transcendent forms, according to her three Guṇas or qualities, and in each of them to have produced a pair of divinities, Brahmā and Sarasvatī, Maheśa and Kālī, Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī, after whose intermarriage, Brahmā and Sarasvatī formed the mundane egg, which Maheśa and Kālī divided into halves; and Viṣṇu, together with Lakṣmī, preserved from destruction. The Tantras, which are full of mysteries and mystical symbols, while they admit the three forms of the female principal to be severally the representatives of the three primary Gūṇas, derive their origin from the conjunction of Bindu, or the sound called Anusvāra, and marked (*) with the Bīja or roots of mantras or incantations. Every specific mantra, or a mantra, peculiar or exclusively belonging to any divinity, consists of Bija or root, and the Anusvāra, which together from what is called a Nāda; and it is from the Nāda, or the combination of the two symbols, that the Three forms of Śakti are said to have had their origin. But this symbolical representation, the Tantras, which exalt Śiva and his bride, above all other divinities, mean, that Bindu and Bīja severally represent Śiva and Śakti. the parents of all other gods and goddesses. Thus: 'The Bindu, which is the soul of Śiva, and the Bīja which is the soul of Śakti, together form the Nāda, from which the three Śaktis are born (Kriyā Sāra Tantra). Here is another attempt of the worshippers of Śiva and his Śakti to identify their guardian divinities with the Supreme Brahma. In the Gorakṣa Sarihītā, we read as follows, 'Will, action, and intelligence are in order the sources of Gaurī, the wife of Śiva, Brāhmī, the wife of Brahmā and Vaiṣṇavī, the wife of Viṣṇu. The theory dismisses altogether the notion of the three Guñas, and substitutes will, action, and intelligence in their place. Again the Šāstras, it appears, have increased the number of the female divinities, according as they have increased the number of the male deities or their incarnations. The Kūrma Purāṇam gives five forms of the original Šakti: 'And she (Mūlā Prakṛti) became in the act of creation fivefold by the will of the supreme.' And the forms which, according to this authority the original Prakṛti is said to have assumed, are: Ist, Durgā, the birde, Šakti, or Māyā of Śiva; 2nd, Lakṣmī, the bride, Šakti, or Māyā of Viṣṇu; 3rd Sarasvatī, the same of Brahmā, or in the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam of Hari, whilst the fourth, Śāvitrī is the bride of Brahmā. The fifth division, Rādhā, is unquestionably, as Dr. Wilson very justly remarks, ‘a modern intruder into the Hindu pantheon.’ In every successive creation of the universe, the Mūlā Prakṛti is said ‘to assume the different gradations of ‘Arñśa-rūpīnī, Kalā-rūpīnī, and Kalāmsa-rūpīnī, or manifests herself in portions, parts and portions of parts and further subdivisions. Thus the writes of the Purāṇas state: ‘In every creation of the world, the Devi, through Divine Yoga assumes divine forms and becomes Amsa-rūpā, Kalā-rūpā, and Kalārūnsa-rūpa, or Arñśārīsa-rūpā. The Arūsas form the class in which all the more important manifestations of the Śakti are comprehended, the Kalās include all the secondary Goddesses, and the Kalārūnsas and Arñśārūsas are subdivisions of the latter, and embrace all womankind, who are distinguished as good, middling or bad, according as they derive their being from the parts of their great original, in which the Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Guṇa predominates. At the same time, being regarded as manifestations of the one Supreme Spirit, they are all entitled not only to respect but to veneration. ‘Whoever,’ says the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam, offends or insults a female' incurs the wrath of Prakṛti, whilst he who propitiates a female, particularly the youthful daughter of a Brāhmin, with clothes, ornaments and perfumes, offers worship to Prakṛti Herscll.' We shall next determine the questions,—What is Śākta, and what is the complexion of his faith? By Śāktas are understood the worshippers of Śakti. This is true only when we take the term Śakti in its restricted sense. This term, which had originally but one primary signification, has in the course of time come to be used in two different senses, a general and a limited one. When taken in its widest sense, it means the allegorical representation of the active energy of God and is synonymous with Mūlā Prakṛti, the primitive source of Gods and men. In its limited sense, it is confined to Śiva Śakti, the Tāmasī, the offspring of darkness, and the last of the first three forms of the original Prakṛti. It is Śakti in this latter sense, the.bride of Śiva, whom, in her manifold forms, the Śaktas worship. The followers of the Śiva Śakti then are alone called Śāktas. Every Hindu may pay his adoration to all the thirty-three Kotis of Gods and Goddesses composing the Hindu pantheon, but one and one only of the five divinities, Viṣṇu. Śiva, Sūrya, Ganapati and Śakti must be his Iṣṭa Devatā or tutelar divinity. Here is the marked distinction between general worshippers and special followers. To render this distinction more clear, we observe, that three are certain general formulas and prayers forming the ritual of worship of every praticalur divinity. These may be learnt by any Hindu from the Śāstras, or from the mouth of a Brāhmaṇa and used in the adoration of any God or Goddess, according to choice or necessity. But besides these general mantras, which may be made use of by any Hindu, without any distinction of sect, there are the Bīja or specific formulas, which are received only from the hallowed lips of the Guru or spiritual guide. These are kept in great secrecy and repeated manntally every day, as a matter of highest religious duty. The God or Goddess, whose Bija or Mūla mantra is received in the prescribed manner, by any devotee, becomes his guardian divinity; and the person, thus initiated, becomes the special follower of that divinity. The Śaktas, then, are the special followers of the Śakti of Śiva. They may in general worship any other God or Goddess, but the bride of Śiva, in one or other of her horrid manifestations, must be their guardian deity. The following passage, quoted from the works of Mr. Colebrooke, will much elucidate the subject. That the Hindus belong to various sects, is universally known. Five great sects, exclusively worship a single deity. One recognises the five divinities, which are adored by the other sects respectively; but the followers of this most comprehensive scheme mostly select one object of daily devotion and pay adoration to other deities on particular occasions only. The Hindu theologists have entered into vain disputes on the question, which, among the attributes of God, shall be deemed characteristic and pre-eminent Śankarācārya, the celebrated commentator on the Vedas, contended for the attributes of Śiva; and founded or confirmed the sect of Śaivas, who worship Mahādeva as the supreme being, and deny the independent existence of Viṣṇu and other Deities. Mādhava Ācārya and Vallabha Ācārya have, in like manner, established the sect of Vaiṣṇavas who adore Viṣṇu as God. The Sauras (less numerous then the two sects above mentione) worship the Sun, and acknowledge no other divinity. The Gānapatyās adore Gānēśa, as uniting in his person all the attributes of the Deity. Before I notice the fifth sect, I must remind the reader, that the Hindu Mythology has personified the abstract and active powers of the divinity; and has ascribed sexes to these mythological personages. The Śakti, or energy of an attribute of God, is female and is fabled as the consort of that personified attribute, * * * The exclusive adorers of the Śakti of Śiva, are the Sāktas. (Asiatic Researches, Vol. VII, pp. 279). The Śāktas, who adopt the female principle in the last of her three principle modifications, as their special divinity,—instead of deriving her origin from the supreme Brahma, use to her the language which is invariably applied to the preferential object of worship in every sect, and contemplate her as the only source of life and existence. She is declared to he equally in all things, and that all things are in her, and that besides her there is nothing. In short, she is identified with the Supreme Being. Thus it is written in the Kāśī Khanda: ‘Thou art predicated in every prayer-Brahmā and the rest are all born from Thee. Thou art one with the four objects of life, and from Thee they come to fruit. From Thee this whole universe proceeds, and in Thee, asylum, of the world, all is, whether visible or invisible, gross or subtle in its nature: what is, Thou art in Śakti form and except Thee nothing has ever been. ‘The Śakti of Śiva being identified with Śaktimān, the Deity, is-declared to be not only superior to Her Lord, but the Cause of Him. Of the two objects (Śiva and Śakti) which are eternal, the greater is the Śakti.’ Again Śakti gives strength to Śiva; without Her he could not stir a straw. She is therefore the Cause of Śiva. (Śaṅkara Vijaya). Although the Purāṇas do, to a certain extent, authorize the adoration of Śakti, yet the principal rites and incantations are derived from a different source. Of the Purāṇas, those which in particular inculcate the worship of the female principle, are the Brahma Vaivarta, the Skanda, and the Kālikā. But neither in them, nor in any other Purāṇam, do we find the Bija or radical mantras which the Śaktis receive from their spiritual guides. These, as well s
NEW CORR ENG ──► Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from the curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhāgavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhāgavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this. Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa. Here ends the Ninth Book. The Ninth Book Completed.
