Chapter 50 - On the Glory of Śakti



1-4. Nārada said :-- “O Bhagavān! I have heard all the anecdotes of Prakriti, as according to the Śāstras, that lead to the freedom from birth and death in this world. Now I want to hear the very secret history of Śrī Rādhā and Durgā as described in the Vedas. Though you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of Samsāra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about them.”

5-44. Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! I am now describing the characters of Rādhā and Durgā, as described in the Vedas; listen. I did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret. Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Rādhā presides over the Prāṇa and Durgā presides over the Buddhi. From these two, the Mūlaprakriti has originated this world. These two Śaktis guide the whole world. From the Mahāvirāt to the small insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mūlaprakriti. One must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained.

Therefore one ought to serve Mūla Prakriti for Her satisfaction. Now of the two in Mūla Prakriti, I will describe fully the Rādhā Mantra. Listen. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and others always worship this mantra. The principal mantra is “Śrī Rādhāyai Svāhā.” By this six lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mūla mantra Hrīm be added, it yields gems and jewels as desired. So much so, if thousand koṭi mouths and one hundred koṭi tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described. When the incorporeal voice of Mūla Prakriti was heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Kṛṣṇa in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are played. (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu got the Mantra; from Viṣṇu, Brahmā got; from Brahmā

Virāt got, from Virāt, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Ṛṣi. Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always on the Mūla Prakriti with greatest joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of Rādhā, never can the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa be done. So men, devoted to Viṣṇu, should first of all worship Rādhā by all means. Rādhā is the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Hence Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so much subject to Rādhā. The Lady of the Rāsa Maṇḍalam remains always close to Him. Without Her Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not live even for a moment. The name Rādhā is derived from “Rādhnoti” or fulfills all desires. Hence Mūla Prakriti is termed Rādhā. I am the Ṛṣi of all the mantras but the Durgā Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gāyatrī is the chanda (mantra) of those mantras and Rādhikā is the Devatā of them. Really, Nārāyaṇa is the Ṛṣi of all the mantras; Gāyatrī is the chanda; Prāṇava (om) is the Vīja (seed) and Bhuvaneśvarī (the Directrix of the world) is the Śakti. First of all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devī Rādhikā, the Śakti of the Ṛṣis is to be done, as mentioned in the Sāma Veda.

The meditation of Rādhā is as follows :-- O Devī Radhike! Thy colour is like white Champaka flower; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Moon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba fruits, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kāñcī) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles; Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments! Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śriṅgāra (love sentiments.) Thou art ever ready to show Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikā and Mālatī are shining; Thy body is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle of Rāsa Maṇḍalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons and another hand expresses “Have no fear.” Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopīkās; Thou art dearer to Kṛṣṇa than even His life; O Parame’svarī! The Vedas reveal Thy nature. Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devī on a Śālagrāma stone, jar, yantra or the eight petalled lotus and then worship Her duly. First the Devī is to be invoked; then Pādya and Āsana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Ācamanīyam water to be offered three times on the face. Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing place where the Devī is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other ornaments are next to be given. Various garlands of flowers with Tulasī Mañjari (flower stalks) Pārijāta flower and Satapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of the Devī are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch). First of all, Mālāvatī on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devī, then Mādhavī on the southeast corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Suśīlā on the south-west, Saśikalā on the west, Pārijāta on the north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the benefactious Sundarī on the north-east corner are to be worshipped in order. Outside this, Brāhmī and the other Mātrikās are to be worshipped and on the Bhūpūras (the entrances of the yantra,) the Regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas and the weapons of the Devī, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped . Then all the attendant Deities of the Devī are to be worshipped with scents and various other articles. Thus finishing the worship, one should chant the Ṣtotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nāma (thousand names) Ṣtotra with care and devotion. O Nārada! The intelligent man who worships thus the Rāseśvarī Devī Rādhā, becomes like Viṣṇu and goes to the Goloka.

He who performs the birthday anniversary of Śrī Rādhā on the Full-Moon day of the month of Kārtik, gets the blessings of Śrī Rādhā who remains near to him. For some reason Rādhā, the dweller in Goloka was born in Brindāban as the daughter of Vṛṣavānu. However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, Puraṣcaraṇa is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of Puraṣcaraṇa, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be done with ghee, honey, and milk; the three sweet things mixed with Til and with devotion.

45. Nārada said :-- “O Bhagavān; Now describe the Ṣtotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devī is pleased.”

46-100. Nārāyaṇa said :-- O Nārada! Now I am saying the Rādhā Ṣtotra. Listen. O Thou, the Highest Deity, the Dweller in Rāsa Maṇḍalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rāsa Maṇḍalam; O Thou dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His life even, I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas bow down before Thy lotus feet. Thou art Sarasvatī; Thou art Savitrī; Thou art Śaṅkarī; I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gaṅgā; Thou art Padmāvatī; Thou art Ṣaṣṭhī; Thou art Mangalā Caṇḍikā; Thou art Manasā; Thou art Tulasī; Thou art Durgā; Thou art Bhagavatī; Thou art Lakṣmī; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Mūla Prakriti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obeisance to Thee! Be merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsāra (round of birth and death). O Nārada! Anybody who remembers Rādhā and reads this Ṣtotra three times a day does not feel the want of anything in this world. He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam. O Child This great secret ought never to be given out to any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durgā Devī. Hear. When any one remembers Durgā in this world, all his difficulties and troubles are removed. It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgā. She is the object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful Śakti of Mahādeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of all. Therefore She is named Durgā in the world. She is worshipped by all, whether a Śaiva or a Vaiṣṇava. She is the Mūla Prakriti and from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe proceed. O Nārada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered Durgā Mantra, the best of all the Mantras. “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” is the nine lettered Vīja mantra of Śrī Durgā; it is like a Kalpa Vrikṣa yielding all desires. One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are the Ṛṣis of this mantra; Gāyatrī, Uṣṇik and Anuṣṭhubha are the chandas; Mahākālī, Mahā Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī are the Devatās; Rakta Dantikā, Durgā, and Bhrāmarī are the Vījas. Nandā, Sākambharī, and Bhīmā are the Śaktis and Dharma (Virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Ṛṣi of the mantra (Nyāsa); assign the chandas to the mouth and assign the Devatā to the heart. Then assign the Śakti to the right breast for the success and assign the Vīja to the left breast.

Then perform the Ṣaḍamga Nyāsa as follows :-- Aim Hridayāya namah, Hrīm Śirase Svāhā, Klīm Śikhāyām Vaṣaṭ, Cāmuṇḍāyai Kavacāya Hum, Vicce Netrābhyām Vauṣaṭ, “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” Karatalapṛṣihābhyām Phaṭ.

Next say touching the corresponding parts of the body :-- “Aim namah Śikhāyām, Hrīm Namah” on the right eye; “Klīm Namah” on the left eye, “Chām Namah” on the right ear, “Mum namah” on the left ear, ṇḍam Namah” on the nostrils; “Vim Namah” on the face; “Ccem Namah” on the anus and finally “Aim Hrīm Klīm Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicce” on the whole body.

Then do the meditation (dhyān) thus :-- “O Cāmuṇḍe! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons, viz., Khaḍga (axe), Cakra (disc), Gadā (club), Vāṇa (arrows), Cāpa (bow), Parigha, Sūla (spear), Bhūśuṇḍī Kapāla, and Khaḍga. Thou art Mahā Kālī; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilāñjan (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet. The Lotus born Brahmā chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha; I bow down to Thee.” Thus one should meditate on Mahā Kālī, of the nature of Kāmavīja (the source whence will comes).

Then the Dhyānam of Mahā Laksmī runs as follows :-- O Mahā Lakṣmī, the destroyer of Mahiṣāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Akṣa (a kind of seed), Paraśu (a kind of axe), Gadā (club), Iṣu (arrows), Kuliśa (the thunderbolt) Padmā (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kuṇdikā (a student’s waterpot), Kamaṇdalu, Daṇḍa (rod for punishment), Śakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma (shield) Padmā (a kind of waterlily), Ghaṇṭā (bell,) Śurāpātra (a pot to hold liquor), Śūla (pickaxe), Pāśa (noose) and Sudarṣana (a kind of weapon). Thy colour is of the Rising Sun. Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature Māyāvīja (the source whence female energy comes). So Obeisance to Thee! (The Vīja and the Devī are one and identical).

Next comes the Dhyānam of Mahā Sarasvatī as follows :-- O Mahā Sarasvatī! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conch shell, Muṣala (a kind of club), Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Kuṇḍa flower; Thou art the destroyer of Śumbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of Vāṇīvīja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes). Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee! O Nārada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahā Sarasvatī. Listen. First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the Śālagrāma stone, or in the jar, or in image, or in the Vāṇaliṅgam, or on the Sun, one should worship the Devī with oneness of heart. Then worship the Pīṭha, the deities seated also on the dais, i.e., Jayā, Vījayā, Ajitā, Aghorā, Mangalā and other Pīṭha Śaktis.

Then worship the attendant deities called Āvaraṇa Pūjā :-- Brahmā with Sarasvatī on the east, Nārāyaṇa with Lakṣmī on the Nairirit corner, Śaṅkara with Pārvatī on the Vāyu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devī, and Mahāsura on the left side of the Devī; finally worship Mahiṣa (buffalo). Next worship

Nandajā, Raktadantā, Śakambharī, Śivā, Durgā, Bhīmā, and Bhrāmarī. Then on the eight petals worship Brahmā, Maheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī, Nāra Simhī, Aindrī, and Cāmuṇḍā. Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devī, worship on the twenty four leaves Viṣṇu Māyā, Cetanā, Buddhi, Nidrā (sleep), hunger, shadow, Śakti, thirst, peace, species (Jāti), modesty, faith, fame, Lakṣmī (wealth), fortitude, Vriti, Śruti, memory, mercy, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi (nourishment), Bhrānti (error) and other Mātrikās. Next on the corners of the Bhūpura (gates of the Yantra), Ganeśa Kṣettrapālas, Vaṭuka and Yoginīs are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings. Then Saptaśati stitra (Caṇḍī pāṭha) is to be repeated before the Devī. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgā, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude). O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devī Durgā. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmā, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogīs full of knowledge, the Āśramīs, and Lakṣmī and the other Devas all meditate on Śivānī. One’s birth is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgā. The fourteen Manus have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus feet of Durgā. O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the very hidden histories of the Five Prakritis and their parts. Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa are obtained by hearing this. He who has no sons gets sons, who has no learning gets learning and whoever wants anything gets that if he hears this. The Devī Jagaddhātrī becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devī. The Devī becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devī. To ascertain before-hand what effects, merits or demerits, would accrue from reading this Bhāgavata, it is necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a Brāhmin child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs. First make a Saṅkalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and again to the Devī Durgā. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the body. Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from the curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhāgavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhāgavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurāṇam Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Here ends the Ninth Book.

The Ninth Book Completed.