CHAPTER L

On the Glory of Šakti

नार दवाच

श्रुतं सर्वेमुपाख्यानं प्रकृतीनां यथातस्थम् ।

शुचा तं मुच्यते जेनुजन्मसंसाराखंघान्ति ॥ 1 ॥

अधाना श्रीतुषिष्ठासि रहस्यं वेदगोपोषिन् ।

राधायाश्रैव वृगाय विधानं शुतिचोदितम् ॥ 2 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard all the anecdotes of Prakṛti, as according to the Śāstras, that lead to the freedom from birth and death in this world. Now I want to hear the very secret history of Śrī Rādhā and Durgā as described in the Vedas. महाम वर्षितोजीत सवता परयोघौंयोः ।

शुचा ते तत्तं चेतोन करय स्वामानुनीश्वर ॥ 3 ॥

ययोरंगो जगत्सर्वे यन्नियच्ये चराचरम् ।

ययोभक्तव्या घनैयुन्सित्धिधानं बदायुना ॥ 4 ॥

Though you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of Samsāra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about t. m.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

शृणु नारद वक्ष्यामि रहस्यं भूतिचोदितम् ।

यन्न कस्यापि चाख्छातं सारास्तारं परात्यम् ॥ 5 ॥

श्रुत्वा परम्ले नो वाच्यं यतोउतींवे रह्यकम् ।

मूल्यकृतिस्फियाः सिंवेदो जगदूद्वे ॥ 6 ॥

Nārāyana said: O Nārada! I am now describing the characters of Rādhā and Durgā, as described in the Vedas listen. I did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret.

प्रादुर्भूतं शक्तियुंगमं प्राणबुद्धाधिदेवतम् ।

जीवानां चैव सर्वेधां निवन्तु प्रेकं सदा ॥ 7 ॥

तद्धीर्नं जनासर्वे विराडादिरचारम् ।

यावत्तयोः प्रसादो न तावन्मोक्षे हि दुर्लंभः ॥ 8 ॥

Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Rādha presides over the Prāna and Durgā presides over the Buddhī. From these two, the Mūlāprakrti has originated this world.

तत्ततयोः प्रसादार्थ नित्यं सेवेत तद्धवम् ।

तत्रादौ राधिकामांरं श्यु नाद भपिताः ॥ 9 ॥

ब्रहाधिष्यवादिभर्पित्यं सेविते यः परात्यम् ।

श्रीधोति चतुर्थतं वढ़ेजाँया ततः परम् ॥ 10 ॥

Book IX Chapter L

These two Šaktis guide the whole world. From the Mahāvirāt to the small insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mūlaprakṛti. One must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained. Therefore one ought to serve Mūlā Prakṛti for Her satisfaction.

पडझरो महामनो धर्माधर्मिकाकाः ।

मायावीजाकिड़ायां यंछाणिंतमाणिः स्मृतः ॥ १ १ ॥

ववककोदिसहसैनु पिछाकोदिशतैरपि ।

गृतनान्यस्य माहात्ययं वर्णितुं नैव शक्यन्ते ॥ १२ ॥

Now of the two in Mūla Prakṛti, I will describe fully the Rādhā Mantra. Listen. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and others always worship this mantra. The principal mantra is ‘Śrī Rādhāyai Svāhā.’ By this six-lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mūla mantra Hrim be added, it yields gems and jewels as desired. So much so, if thousand koti mouths and one hundred koti tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described.

जग्रह प्रवर्ग मन्त्र श्रीकृष्णा भक्तित्वरः ।

उपदेशामूलदेव्या गोलोके रासमपड़ते ॥ १३ ॥

विष्णुलेनेपविद्धसुने तेन बढ़ा विराट् तथा ।

तेन धर्मतेन चाहमिवेशा हि परमयं ।। १४ ॥

When the incorporeal voice of Mūla Prakṛti was heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Krṣṇa in the Rāsa Maṇḍalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are played : (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Krṣṇa. Viṣṇu got the Mantra; from Viṣṇu, Brahmā got; from Brahmā Virāt got, from Virāt, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Rṣi.

अर्हे जपायि ते मन्ते तेनाहमृषिवीक्षितः ।

इद्याता: सकल देवा नित्यं धार्यति तां मुदा ॥ 15 ॥

कृष्णाचार्यां नाधिकारो यतो राधार्यचं निवा ।

वैधावे: सकलैस्तस्मात्कर्तेयं राधिकार्चिन् ॥ 16 ॥

Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always on the Mūlā Prakṛti with greatest joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of of Rādhā, never can the

worship of Śri Krṣṇa be done. So men, devoted to Viṣṇu, should first of all worship Rādhā by all means. Rādhā is the Presiding Deity of the Prāṇa of Śri Krṣṇa. Hence Śri Krṣṇa is so much subject to Rādhā. The Lady of the Rāsa Māndalam remains always close to Him.

कृष्णप्राणाधिद्वी सा तदधीनी विषूमैतः ।

रासेधी तस्य नित्य तया हीनो न तिष्ठति ॥ 17 ॥

राठाति सकल्कामांतस्माद्धधिति कीर्तिता ।

अजोक्तानं मनूनां च ऋषिरत्यमृदोच च ॥ 18 ॥

छंद्ध उद्वी गायत्री देवताउत्र च राधिका ।

Without Her Śrī Krṣṇa could not live even for a moment. The name Rādhā is derived from ‘Rādhnoti’ or fulfills all desires. Hence Mūlā Prakṛti is termed Rādhā. I am the Rṣi of all the mantras but the Durgā Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gāyatrī is the chanda (mantra) of those mantras and Rādhikā is the Devatā of them. 

तारो बीजं शफिकीयं शफित्स्तु परिकीति ति ॥ 19 ॥

मूल वृत्ता चर्भगानि कर्तव्यानीतरत्र च ।

अथ ध्यायेम्हादौर्वी राशिकां रासनायिकम् ॥ 20 ॥

Really, Nārāyaṇa is the Rṣi of all the mantras; Gāyatrī is the chanda; Pranava (om) is the Bija (seed) and Bhuvaneśvarī (the Directrix of the world) is the Śakti. First of all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devi Rādhikā, the Śakti of the Rāsa is to be done, as mentioned in the Sāma Veda.

पूर्वोक्तीर्या तु मुने सापवेदे र्वितीर्या ।

श्वेतचंपकवर्णाधां शारिदुसुमानानम् ॥ 21 ॥

कोदिचन्द्रसीकारां शरद्वभोजलोचनाम् ।

विद्वाधरां पृचुश्रीणं काडीयुतनित्रिविनीम् ॥ 22 ॥

कुंदपक्तिसमानाघदंतपंक्तिविरावजिताम् ।

श्रीमांकरपरीधानां वहिकुण्ड्वांगृकान्तिवतम् ॥ 23 ॥

ईषवद्वायमसजायां कर्तिकुमयगुगतनीम् ।

सदा झादशवर्षीयां रत्नपूषणपृष्टितम् ॥ 24 ॥

शूज्ञारसिंगुरुहर्गे भक्तानुग्रहकातनम् ।

मल्लिकामाल्तीमालोकेशपारामविराजितम् ॥ 25 ॥

सुकुमारांगलितकां रासमपडलमध्यागम् ।

The meditation of Rádhā is as follows: “O Devi Rádhike! Thy colour is like white Campaka

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

flowers; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Mon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba frutis, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kānci) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles. Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments; Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śrīgāra (love sentiments). Thou art ever ready to shew Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikā and Mālati are shining; Thy body is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle of Rāsa Maṇḍalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons and another hand expresses ‘Have no fear.’

वराभयकरां शान्ता शश्रतुष्तियर्योवान् ॥ 26 ॥

त्वनिश्रहासासीना गोपीमंखलायिकाम् ।

कृष्णप्राणाधिकां वेदवोधितां परमेश्वीम् ॥ 27 ॥

एवं ध्याता ततो बाहो शालामे घरेउव्वा ।

चनै वातद्वलै देवीं पुरवेषु चित्धानतः ॥ 28 ॥

Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopikāś; Thou art dearer to Krṣna than even His life; O Parameśvarī! The Vedas reveal Thy nature." Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devi on a Śālāgramā stone, jar, yantra or the eight-petalled lotus and then worship Her duly.

आवाहा देवी तन्यश्रादासनादि प्रतीयताम ।

मूलमन्नं समुष्चार्यं चासनाटीनी कलयवेत् ॥ 29 ॥

गाथं तु पादवोद्वीयान्सतेकंघर्यं समीरितम् ।

मुखे त्वाचमनीयं स्यातिवगरं गृलिविद्या ॥ 30 ॥

First the Devi \( ^{1} \) is to be invoked; then Fādya and Āśana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Ācamanīyam water to be offered times on the face.

मधुपकं ततो ददादिकां गां च पर्यविस्नीम् ।

ततो नयेत्नानगलां तां च तदैव भावयेत् ॥ 31 ॥

अभ्यूजिद्वनाविधि कल्यिलावाउव वाससी ।

ततश्च चन्दनं ददाचानालंकारपूर्वकम् ॥ 32 ॥

Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing place where the Devi is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other ornaments are next to be given.

पुष्यमाला बहुविधास्तुलसीमज्वरीयुतः । पारिजानप्रभूर्नानि शतपत्रविकानि च ॥ 33 ॥ ततः कुर्बाल्यविद्धं तत्परितारार्चं तिथपोः । अन्नीसातुरावयव्यमध्यदिष्ट्वंभगुजनम् ॥ 34 ॥ कृत्वा पश्वाद्वटदे दक्षिणावर्तनोंउग्रतः ।

Various garlands of flowers with Tulasi Mañjari (flower stalks) Parijāta flower and Śatapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of the Devi are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch).

मालावतीमप्रदले वहिकोणे च माधवीम् ॥ 35 ॥

रन्माला दक्षिणे च नैक्षेले तु सुगीलकाम् ।

पक्षाहले शफिकलां पूजयेमतिमाजरः ॥ 36 ॥

मालते पारिजातां चायुन्ते च परवातीम् ।

ईशानकोले सम्पूखा सूदरी प्रियकारिणी ॥ 37 ॥

First of all, Mālāvatī on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devī, then Mādhavī on the south-east corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Suśilā on the south-west Saśikalā on the west, Pārījātā on the north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the benefactious Sundarī on the north-east corner are to be worshipped in order.

बाहुधादयस्तु तद्धाठो प्रणशाणालंस्तु भूयुं ।

वज्रादिकान्यायुपानि देवीमिचर्य प्रपूजेण ।। 38 ॥

तते देईी सावरणों गावाडीरूपचारकैः ।

राजपचारसहितैः पूजेचन्मतिभावरः ॥ 39 ॥

Outside this, Brāhmi and the other Mārṭkās are to be worshipped and on the Bhūpūras (the entrances of the yantra), the Regents of the quarters,

Book IX Chapter L

the Dikpālas and weapons of the Devi, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped. Then all the attendant Deities of the Devi are to be worshipped with scents and various other articles.

ततः सुर्जीत देवेपीं सतीर्थीमसहस्वकः ।

सहस्वसंखं च जयं नित्यं कुयित्यन्तः ॥ 40 ॥

य एवं पुजदेवेहीं राशि राशिशं परम् ।

स घवेडिष्युतृल्यन्तु गोलोकं याति संतन्तम् ॥ 4 1 ॥

Thou finishing the worship, one should chant the Stotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nāma (thousand names) Stotra with care and devotion. O Nārada! The intelligent man who worships thus the Rāseśvari Devi Rādhā, becomes like Viṣṇu and goes to the Go-loka.

यः कार्तिक्यों घौणीमास्यां राधाजन्मोत्सर्वे बुधः ।

कृते तत्पर साधिश्यं द्वादासोस्पशी परा ॥ 42 ॥

केनपिकालारोपैल राधा बुद्धावने वने ।

वृषभानुस्तु जाता गोलोकस्थाविनी सदा ॥ 43 ॥

He who performs the birth-day anniversary of Śrī Rādhā on the Full-Moon day of the month of Kārtika, gets the blessing of Śrī Rādhā who remains near to him. For some reason Rādhā, the dweller in Goloka was born in Vrndāvana as the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu.

अंगैक्तानां तु मंग्राणां वर्गसंख्याविधानतः ।

पुरुषाणकामोंक द्वारांगी होमामाचेत् ॥ 44 ॥

तत्लैक्ष्वसादुसंयुत्कौजुंद्याद्विकभावतः ।

However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, Puraścarapa is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of Puraścarapa, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be done with ghee, honey, and milk the three sweet mixed with Til and with devotion.

नात्व ज्ञाच

स्तोत्रं वद मुने सत्ययेन देवी प्रसीद्ति ॥ 4 5 ॥

Nārada said: O Bhagavan; Now describe the Stotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devi is pleased.

श्रीनारायण उवाच

नमसे परशेगानि रासमण्डलासिनि ।

रासेश्वरि नमसे5सुत कृष्णप्राणाधिकप्रिये ॥ 46 ॥

नमसैलोकयजननि प्रसीद ककाणणये ।

ब्रहाधिव्यादिविर्वैर्वेर्विमानपदांबुजे ॥ 47 ॥

Nārāyaṇa said: O Nārada! Now I am saying the Rādhā Stotra. O Thou, the Highest Deity! the Dweller in Rāsa Mandalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rāsa Mandalam; O Thou dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His life even, I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the other Devas bow down before Thy lotus feet.

नमः सरस्वतीफे नमः सास्वित्र शंकरि ।

गंगापावातीसोः पश्रि मंगलर्शिके ॥48 ॥

नमसे तुलसीको नमो लक्षीस्वरूपिणि ।

नमो दुर्गै भगवति नमसे सर्वीपणि ॥ 49 ॥

Thou art Sarasvati; Thou art Sāvitri; Thou art Śaṅkari I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gāngā; Thou art Padmāvati; Thou art Saṣthi; Thou art Maṅgala Caṇḍikā; Thou art Manasā, Thou art Tulasi; Thou art Durgā; Thou art Bhagavati; Thou art Lakṣmī; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee.

मूल्यकृतिक्वा तां बपाना: करणाणर्गाल्म।

संसारसगरादस्मानुद्धारांद वभा कुरु ॥50॥

इर्वे स्तोत्र सितस्यं यः पटेश्वां समसरः ।

न तस्य दुरुर्भे किष्ठिक्वाराचित्वच भविष्यति ॥51॥

Thou art the Mūlā Prakṛti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obesiance to Thee! Be merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsāra (round of british and death).” O Nārada! Any body who remembers Rādhā and reads this Stotra three times a day does not feel the want of any thing in this world.

देहान्ते च वसेघित्वं गोलोके रासमण्डले ।

इर्वं रहस्यं परमं न चाख्येयं तु कस्यित् ॥ 52 ॥

अधुना भगुण विधेन्र दुगादेव्या विधानकम् ।

यस्या: ससगामाजेण लावयन्ते महापदः ॥ 53 ॥

He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rāsa Manḍalam. O Child! This great secret aught never to be given out to any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durgā Devi.

Hear. When any one remembers Durgā in this world, all his difficulties and troubles are removed. एनां न भजते यो हि तातुकृतास्वेव कुत्रचित् ।

सर्वपास्या सर्वमाता शैली शफिन्महादुतां ॥ 54 ॥

सर्वबुद्धादिवेदीयमन्त्यांसिध्स्वलिपणी ।

दुरांसंकटईजीति दुर्गेति प्रधिता भुवि ॥ 55 ॥

It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgā. She is the object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful Śakti of Mahādeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of all.

दैषावानां च शैवानापुाययें च निवर्शः ।

पूल्यकृतिल्पा सा सृधिधिस्थल्नकारिणि ॥ 56 ॥

तस्या नावक्षरं मंत्र वक्ष्ये मंत्रोत्तमात्मम् ।

वाग्भवं शेषुवित्ति कामवीजं ततः परम् ॥ 57 ॥

Therefore She is named Durgā in the world. She is worshipped by all, whether a Śaiva or a Vaiṣnava. She is the Mūlā Prakṛti and from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe proceed. O Nārada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered Durgā Mantra, the best of all the Mantras.

चागुपाढ्यै पदं पश्ठापृष्टेचे इत्यक्षतद्वयम् ।

नवाक्षरो मनु: प्रोत्नो भजतां कल्पपादय: ॥ 58 ॥

ब्रहाविष्णुमंशना ऋषयोःय प्रवीर्तिता: ।

छ-तद्यमृत्तानि सततं गायव्युविणानुकुधः ॥ 59 ॥

महाकाली महातक्ष्मी: सरस्वत्यपि देवता: ।

स्यात्रक्नैतिकांवीं तुर्ण च भागरी तथा ॥ 60 ॥

'Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicee' is the nine lettered Bijā mantra of Śri Durgā; it is like a Kalpa Vṛksa yielding all desires. One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmā Viṣṇu, and Maheśa are the Rṣis of this mantra; Gāyatrī, Uṣnik and Anuṣṭubha are the chandas; Mahākālī, Mahā Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī are the Devatās; Rakta Dantikā, Durgā, and Bhrāmari are the Bijas.

नंहागकंभरोदेथी भीमा च शक्यः सुतः ।

धर्मार्थकामेधुय विविणेया उद्वाहतः ॥ 6 I I ||

ऋषिच्छेदो दैवतानि मौली वक्ने हृदि गयेत् ।

सतनयोः शक्तिक्रीजानि न्यसेलवार्थीसिद्धये ॥ 62 ॥

Nandā, Śākambhari, and Bhimā are the Śaktis and Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kāma (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Rṣi of the mantra (Nyāsa); assign the chandas to the mouth assign the Devatā to the heart.

कीजरवैश्रुत्प्रिश्र श्राव्यां सर्वेण चैव हि ।

चर्भानि मनैः कुर्बाजातितुस्नानि देशिकाः ॥ 63 ॥

शिखायां लोचनाद्रदे शुतिनासाननेषु च ।

गुदे यसेन्यन्वरणां-सर्वेण व्यापकं चेते ॥ 64 ॥

Then assign the Śakti to the right breast for the success and assign the Bija to the left breast. Then perform the Śadaṅga Nyāsa as follows: Aim Hrdayāya namah, Hrim Śirase Svāhā, Klim Śikhāyām Vaṣat, Cāmuṇḍāyai Kavacāya Hum, Vicec Netrābhyām Vauṣat, ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ Karatalaprṣṭhābhyām Phat. Next say touching the corresponding parts of the body: ‘Aim namah Śikhāyām, Hrim Namah’ on the right eye; ‘Klim Namah’ on the left eye, Cām Namah ‘on the right ear, ‘Mum namah’ on the left ear, nḍām Namah’ on the nostrils; Vim Namah on the face; ‘Ccem Namah’ on the anus and finally ‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuṇḍāyai Vicec’ on the whole body. Then do the meditation (dhyaña) thus:

खदुगचक्रान्दावणचापनि परिधे तथा ।

गृलं भुगुंडी च शिरः शुबुं संद्धवर्ती करेः ॥ 65 ॥

महाकालिं जिनवर्नो नानाभूषणभूषितम् ।

नीलाजनसमप्रख्यां दशपादानां भजे ॥ 66 ॥

‘O Cāmundê! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons viz, Khadga (axe) Cakra (disc) Gadā (club) Bāna (arrows), Cāpa (bow), Parighā, Śūla (spear), Bhusūndī Kapāla, and Khadga. Thou art Mahā Kāli; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilānjana (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet.

मधुकैट्यनाश्यां यां नुहायाम्बुजासनः ।

एवं ध्यायेन्महाकाली कामवीजस्वलिपिणीम् ॥ 67 ॥

Book IX Chapter L

अक्षमालां च परगुं गदेषकुलिशानि च ।

पदां ध्रपुक्षीडकां च दंडशक्तिमर्स सत् ॥ 6 8 ॥

चार्मिङ्गं तथा घण्टां सुरायपां च शुल्कम् ।

पाणं सुदर्शनं चैव द्धतीमरणप्रभाम् ॥ 6 9 ॥

The Lotus born Brahmā chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha I bow down to Thee." Thus one should meditate on Mahā Kālī, of the nature of Kāmabija (the source whence will comes). Then the Dhyānam of Mahā Lakṣmī runs as follows: "O Mahā Laksmī, the destroyer of Mahisāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Aksa (a king of seed), Paraśu (a kind of axe), Gādā (club), Işu (arrows), Kuliśa (the thunderbolt) Padma (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kunḍikā (a student's waterpot, Kamandalu), Danda (rod for punishment), Śakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma (shield) Padma (a king of waterlily), Ghaṇā (bell), (Surāpātra) (a pot to hold liquor), Śula (pick-axe) Pāśa (noosc) and Sudarśana (a kind of weapon. Thy colour is of the Rising Sun.

रकायाजुसनगतं मायावीज्यस्करिपिण् ।

महालक्षीं भवेदेदं महिषासुमर्दिनीय ॥70 ॥

Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature Māyābija (the source whence female energy comes). So Obcisance to Thee! (The Bija and the Devi are one and identical).” Next comes the Dhyānan of Mahā Sarasvatī as follows:

पटगुशूले हलं शंखं मुसलं च सुदर्भान् ।

धनुर्बाणान्हसपदौर्धानां कृदस्विभान् ॥ 71 ॥

ग्रामादिद्वेत्यसंर्जीं वाणाडीजस्वक्रिपिण् ।

महासरस्वती ध्यावेत्सचिद्यानन्दिव्याह्न् ॥ 72 ॥

O Mahā Sarasvatī! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conchshell, Musala (a kind of club), Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Kunda flower; Thou art the destroyer of Śumbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of Vānibja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes.

घंत्रमस्या: शृण प्राज ज्यसं घट्कोणसंयुन्ति ।

ततो3हदलपत्रं च नतुर्गविशतपत्रकम् ॥ 73 ॥

Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee!" O Nārada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahā Sarasvatī. Listen.

भूगृहेण समायुक्ते यन्मेवं विचितन्तेत् ।

शाल्यामे चेटा प्रति यन्चे वा प्रतिमासु वा ॥ 74 ॥

बाणलिंगेधवा सूर्ये ये जेहेदीमन्यधीः ।

जयादिगतिसंयुक्ते पीढे देवीं प्रपूजन्ते ॥ 75 ॥

First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the Sâlagrâma stone, or in the jar, or in image, or in the Vanalingam, or on the Sun, one should worship the Devi with oneness of heart.

पूर्वकीणे सरस्वत्या सहितं पयजं यजेत् ।

शिवा सह हर्त तत्र नैस्क्रौ कोणके यजेत् ॥ 76 ॥

पार्वत्या सहितं शम्भुं वायुकोणे समचर्येत् ।

देव्या उत्तरतः पुर्वः सिंहो वायो महासुरम् ॥ 77 ॥

Then worship the Piṭha, the deities seated also on the dais, i.e., Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aghorā, Mangālā and other Pitha Śaktis. Then worship the attendant deities called Āvaraṇa Pūjā: Brahmā with Sarasvatī on the east, Ārāyaṇas with Lakṣmī on the Nairrit corner, Śankara with Pārvatī on the Vāyu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devi, and Mahāśura on the left side of the Devi; finally worship Mahisa (buffalo).

महिषं पुजयदन्ते चट्कोगेषु यजेकामात् ।

नंदर्ग रक्तदांं च तथा शाकर्षी शिजाम् ॥ 78 ॥

दुर्गा भीमां घामरीं च तते वसुदलेषु च ।

ब्राह्मी महेश्वरों चैव कौमार्ति वैश्यावी तथा ॥ 79 ॥

वागहीं गारसिंहीं च ऐस्टीं चाभुंकको तथा ।

पूजयेच्च ततः पश्रात्त्वपत्रेषु पूर्वतः ॥ 80 ॥

विष्णुभावां चेतनां च बुद्धि निहां सुधां तथा ।

छायाशक्ति परां तृणां शांति जातिं च लजवा ॥ 81 ॥

शांति भर्ता कॉलिल्ब्ब्यो धृति झृति श्रुति सूचीम् ।

दया तृष्टि ततः पृष्टि मातुभांती इति क्रमात् ॥ 82 ॥

Next worship Nandajā, Raktadantā, Sākambhari, Śivā, Durgā, Bhimā, and Bhāramī. Then on the

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

eight petals worship Brāhmī, Maheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaispavī, Vārāhī, Nāra Sīnīhī, Aindrī, and Cāmuṇḍā. Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devī, worship on the twenty-four leaves Viṣnu Māyā, Cetanā, Buddhi, Nidrā (sleep), hunger, a shadow, Šakti, thirst, peace, species (Jāti), modesty, faith, fame, Lakṣmī (wealth), fortitude, Vṛtti, Śruti memory, mercy, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi (nourishment), Bhrānti (error) and other Matṛkās.

ततो भपुरकोगेषु गणोगं क्षेत्रपालकम् ।

बढ़के योगिनीशापि पूजेयन्मितागतः ॥ 8 3 ॥

इन्हाटानि नहाहो वज्ञादायुपसंयुतान् ।

पूजयेदत्या तीता देहीं सारिणां ततः ॥ 84 ॥

राजोपचारनिविधान्द्यादायप्रतुये ।

ततो जपेत्रजणीं च मनं मनार्थपूर्वकम् ॥ 85 ॥

Next on the corners of the Bhūpura (gates of the Yantra), Ganesa Kṣetraṇālas, Vatuka and Yoginis are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings.

ततः सदगतशीतांते देख्या अगे तु संपटेत् ।

नानेन सद्गं स्तोत्र विहते घनवत्रये ॥ 86 ॥

ततश्वानेन देवेशी तोपेवेत्रवर्लं नरः ।

धार्यार्काममोक्षाणामालयं जायते नः ॥ 87 ॥

Then Saptaśati stotra (Candī pātha) is to be repeated before the Devi. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgā, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kāma, and Mokṣa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude).

इति ते कथितं विध प्रशुनीया विधानकम् ।

कृताधौत येन भवेनैदत्कथितं तव ॥ 88 ॥

सर्वे देवा हरिब्धाप्रसुखा मनवस्तथा ।

मुनयो ज्ञाननिष्ठा योगिनश्ठाभमातला ॥ 89 ॥ लक्ष्याद्वस्तथा देव्यः सर्वे धायरित्त तां शिवाम् ।

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devi Durgā. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmā, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogis full of knowledge, the Śāramīs, and Lakṣmī and the other Devas all meditate on Śivām.

तदैव जनसाकल्यं दुर्गासरणामस्ति चेत् ॥ 90 ॥

चतुर्वर्णीय मनोय धात्वा चरणपढ़जम् ।

मन्तूर्ण प्राणवतन्छं द्वेता: चंवं चयं पदं तथा ॥ 91 ॥

One's birth is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgā. The fourteen Manus have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus feet of Durgā.

तदात्तर्वमात्यातं रह्यातिरहस्यकम् ।

प्रकृतीनां पड्डकस्य तदैशानां च वर्णनम् ॥ 92 ॥

श्रूवैतनमुजी नित्य पुरुषावधैतुर्धयम् ।

लभते नात्र सन्देशः सत्यं सत्यं मयोदितम् ॥ 93 ॥

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you the very hidden histories of the Five Praktrīs and their parts. Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kāma and Mokṣa are obtained by hearing this.

अपुत्रो लभते पुत्रं विद्यार्थी प्राप्यान्धच तान् ।

यें ये कांमं सरेपुत्रीप तंतं श्रुत्वा समाप्यान् ॥ 94 ॥

नवराते पदेतेद्रवेधये तु स्माहितः ।

परितुया जगद्धारी भवत्येव हिं निश्रित् ॥ 95 ॥

He who has no sons gets sons, who has no learning gets learning and whoever wants any thing gets that if he hears this. The Devi Jagaddhārī becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devi.

निव्यमेकैकमध्यार्यं पदेशः प्रत्यहं नरः ।

तस्य वर्णा भवेद्रेही देवौ प्रियकतो हि सः ॥ 96 ॥

गरुक्नांशं परीक्षेत निव्यमायन्याशिविधि ।

कुमारीविद्यहरत्ने यद्धा बदुकराभ्यज्ञान् ॥ 97 ॥

The Devi becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devi.

Book IX Chapter L

To ascertain before-hand what offects, merits or demerits, would accure from reading this Bhāgavata, it is necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a Brāhmim child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs.

मनोरथे तु सङ्कूल्य पुस्तकें पूजयेततः ।

देवी च जगदीशानां प्रणमेच चुनः पुनः : चुनः ॥98॥

सुस्तांत कन्यकां ततन्योविष्यचें यथाविति ।

शलाकां रोपयेमध्ये तथा स्वर्णेन निर्मितम् ॥ 99 ॥

First make a Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and again to the Devi Durgā. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the body.

शुभं वाज्यशुभं तव यदायाति च तद्वयेत् ।

उद्वातीतेयुवारीने कार्य घबाति निशितम् ॥ 100 ॥

इति शीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे नवमस्कन्धे

पंचासतमोउधाया: ॥ 101 ॥

Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from curves made by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhagavata would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, know the result of reading the Bhagavata would be similar. There is no doubt in this.

Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on

the glory of Śakti in the Mahāpurānam

Śrimaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses

by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

बाणाधिस्वरामैनु साई. (362511) स्नोकों: सुवितरैं.

देवीभागवतस्याय नवमः स्कन्ध इरीतः ॥102॥

समाजातेयं नवमः स्कन्धः ॥103॥

Here ends the Ninth Book.

The Ninth Book Completed.

Notes on Śakti and the Śāktas

Extracts from the Calcutta Review. No. XLVII, March 1855.

The Śāktas—Their characteristics and Practical influence in society.

In the Mārkāndeya Purānam, Nature (Prakṛti) is said ‘to have assumed three transcendent forms, according to her three Guṇas or qualities, and in each of them to have produced a pair of divinities, Brahmā and Sarasvatī, Maheśa and Kālī, Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī, after whose intermarriage, Brahmā and Sarasvatī formed the mundane egg, which Maheśa and Kālī divided into halves; and Viṣṇu, together with Lakṣmī, preserved from destruction.

The Tantras, which are full of mysteries and mystical symbols, while they admit the three forms of the female principal to be severally the representatives of the three primary Gūṇas, derive their origin from the conjunction of Bindu, or the sound called Anusvāra, and marked (*) with the Bīja or roots of mantras or incantations. Every specific mantra, or a mantra, peculiar or exclusively belonging to any divinity, consists of Bija or root, and the Anusvāra, which together from what is called a Nāda; and it is from the Nāda, or the combination of the two symbols, that the Three forms of Śakti are said to have had their origin. But this symbolical representation, the Tantras, which exalt Śiva and his bride, above all other divinities, mean, that Bindu and Bīja severally represent Śiva and Śakti. the parents of all other gods and goddesses. Thus: 'The Bindu, which is the soul of Śiva, and the Bīja which is the soul of Śakti, together form the Nāda, from which the three Śaktis are born (Kriyā Sāra Tantra). Here is another attempt of the worshippers of Śiva and his Śakti to identify their guardian divinities with the Supreme Brahma.

In the Gorakṣa Sarihītā, we read as follows, 'Will, action, and intelligence are in order the sources of Gaurī, the wife of Śiva, Brāhmī, the wife of Brahmā and Vaiṣṇavī, the wife of Viṣṇu.

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

The theory dismisses altogether the notion of the three Guñas, and substitutes will, action, and intelligence in their place.

Again the Šāstras, it appears, have increased the number of the female divinities, according as they have increased the number of the male deities or their incarnations. The Kūrma Purāṇam gives five forms of the original Šakti: 'And she (Mūlā Prakṛti) became in the act of creation fivefold by the will of the supreme.' And the forms which, according to this authority the original Prakṛti is said to have assumed, are: Ist, Durgā, the birde, Šakti, or Māyā of Śiva; 2nd, Lakṣmī, the bride, Šakti, or Māyā of Viṣṇu; 3rd Sarasvatī, the same of Brahmā, or in the Brahma Vaivarta Purānam of Hari, whilst the fourth, Śāvitrī is the bride of Brahmā. The fifth division, Rādhā, is unquestionably, as Dr. Wilson very justly remarks, ‘a modern intruder into the Hindu pantheon.’

In every successive creation of the universe, the Mūlā Prakṛti is said ‘to assume the different gradations of ‘Arñśa-rūpīnī, Kalā-rūpīnī, and Kalāmsa-rūpīnī, or manifests herself in portions, parts and portions of parts and further subdivisions. Thus the writes of the Purāṇas state: ‘In every creation of the world, the Devi, through Divine Yoga assumes divine forms and becomes Amsa-rūpā, Kalā-rūpā, and Kalārūnsa-rūpa, or Arñśārīsa-rūpā. The Arūsas form the class in which all the more important manifestations of the Śakti are comprehended, the Kalās include all the secondary Goddesses, and the Kalārūnsas and Arñśārūsas are subdivisions of the latter, and embrace all womankind, who are distinguished as good, middling or bad, according as they derive their being from the parts of their great original, in which the Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Guṇa predominates. At the same time, being regarded as manifestations of the one Supreme Spirit, they are all entitled not only to respect but to veneration. ‘Whoever,’ says the Brahma Vaivarta

Purānam, offends or insults a female' incurs the wrath of Prakṛti, whilst he who propitiates a female, particularly the youthful daughter of a Brāhmin, with clothes, ornaments and perfumes, offers worship to Prakṛti Herscll.'

We shall next determine the questions,—What is Śākta, and what is the complexion of his faith? By Śāktas are understood the worshippers of Śakti. This is true only when we take the term Śakti in its restricted sense. This term, which had originally but one primary signification, has in the course of time come to be used in two different senses, a general and a limited one. When taken in its widest sense, it means the allegorical representation of the active energy of God and is synonymous with Mūlā Prakṛti, the primitive source of Gods and men. In its limited sense, it is confined to Śiva Śakti, the Tāmasī, the offspring of darkness, and the last of the first three forms of the original Prakṛti. It is Śakti in this latter sense, the.bride of Śiva, whom, in her manifold forms, the Śaktas worship. The followers of the Śiva Śakti then are alone called Śāktas.

Every Hindu may pay his adoration to all the thirty-three Kotis of Gods and Goddesses composing the Hindu pantheon, but one and one only of the five divinities, Viṣṇu. Śiva, Sūrya, Ganapati and Śakti must be his Iṣṭa Devatā or tutelar divinity. Here is the marked distinction between general worshippers and special followers. To render this distinction more clear, we observe, that three are certain general formulas and prayers forming the ritual of worship of every praticalur divinity. These may be learnt by any Hindu from the Śāstras, or from the mouth of a Brāhmaṇa and used in the adoration of any God or Goddess, according to choice or necessity. But besides these general mantras, which may be made use of by any Hindu, without any distinction of sect, there are the Bīja or specific formulas, which are received only from

Book IX Chapter L

the hallowed lips of the Guru or spiritual guide. These are kept in great secrecy and repeated manntally every day, as a matter of highest religious duty. The God or Goddess, whose Bija or Mūla mantra is received in the prescribed manner, by any devotee, becomes his guardian divinity; and the person, thus initiated, becomes the special follower of that divinity. The Śaktas, then, are the special followers of the Śakti of Śiva. They may in general worship any other God or Goddess, but the bride of Śiva, in one or other of her horrid manifestations, must be their guardian deity. The following passage, quoted from the works of Mr. Colebrooke, will much elucidate the subject.

That the Hindus belong to various sects, is universally known. Five great sects, exclusively worship a single deity. One recognises the five divinities, which are adored by the other sects respectively; but the followers of this most comprehensive scheme mostly select one object of daily devotion and pay adoration to other deities on particular occasions only. The Hindu theologists have entered into vain disputes on the question, which, among the attributes of God, shall be deemed characteristic and pre-eminent Śankarācārya, the celebrated commentator on the Vedas, contended for the attributes of Śiva; and founded or confirmed the sect of Śaivas, who worship Mahādeva as the supreme being, and deny the independent existence of Viṣṇu and other Deities. Mādhava Ācārya and Vallabha Ācārya have, in like manner, established the sect of Vaiṣṇavas who adore Viṣṇu as God. The Sauras (less numerous then the two sects above mentione) worship the Sun, and acknowledge no other divinity. The Gānapatyās adore Gānēśa, as uniting in his person all the attributes of the Deity. Before I notice the fifth sect, I must remind the reader, that the Hindu Mythology has personified the abstract and active powers of the divinity; and

has ascribed sexes to these mythological personages. The Śakti, or energy of an attribute of God, is female and is fabled as the consort of that personified attribute, * * * The exclusive adorers of the Śakti of Śiva, are the Sāktas. (Asiatic Researches, Vol. VII, pp. 279).

The Śāktas, who adopt the female principle in the last of her three principle modifications, as their special divinity,—instead of deriving her origin from the supreme Brahma, use to her the language which is invariably applied to the preferential object of worship in every sect, and contemplate her as the only source of life and existence. She is declared to he equally in all things, and that all things are in her, and that besides her there is nothing. In short, she is identified with the Supreme Being. Thus it is written in the Kāśī Khanda: ‘Thou art predicated in every prayer-Brahmā and the rest are all born from Thee. Thou art one with the four objects of life, and from Thee they come to fruit. From Thee this whole universe proceeds, and in Thee, asylum, of the world, all is, whether visible or invisible, gross or subtle in its nature: what is, Thou art in Śakti form and except Thee nothing has ever been. ‘The Śakti of Śiva being identified with Śaktimān, the Deity, is-declared to be not only superior to Her Lord, but the Cause of Him. Of the two objects (Śiva and Śakti) which are eternal, the greater is the Śakti.’ Again Śakti gives strength to Śiva; without Her he could not stir a straw. She is therefore the Cause of Śiva. (Śaṅkara Vijaya).

Although the Purāṇas do, to a certain extent, authorize the adoration of Śakti, yet the principal rites and incantations are derived from a different source. Of the Purāṇas, those which in particular inculcate the worship of the female principle, are the Brahma Vaivarta, the Skanda, and the Kālikā. But neither in them, nor in any other Purāṇam, do we find the Bija or radical mantras which the Śaktis receive from their spiritual guides. These, as well

s