CHAPTER XXXIII

On the Devi's Virāḥ Rūpa

देल्युवाच

मन्मायाशक्तिसंकल्पं जगत्सर्वं चराचरम् ।

साउपि मत: पृथड्यामाया नारनेव परमार्वतः ॥ १ ॥

व्यवहारुद्रगा सेयं विहा मायेति विश्रुता ।

तत्वपूछ्या तु नारस्येव तत्वपेवास्ति केवलम् ॥ २ ॥

The Devi said: “O Girirāja! This whole universe, moving and unmoving, is created by My Māyā Śakti. This Māyā is conceived in Me. It is not, in reality, different or separate from Me. So I am the only Cit, Intelligence. There is no other intelligence than Me.

Viewed practically, it is known variously as Māyā, Vidyā; but viewed really from the point of

Brahman, there is no such thing as Māyā; only one Brahman exists.

साउर्ड सर्वे जनासृष्ट्वा तदेतः प्रविशाण्यम् ।

मायाकर्मादिर्वहित गिरे प्राणपुःसरा ॥ ३ ॥

लोकान्तरागितिचें चेकत्थं स्यादिति हेतुना ।

यथा यथा भवैत्येव मायाभैत्स्तथा तथा ॥ ४ ॥

I am that Brahma, of the nature of Intelligence. I create this whole world on this Unchangeable Eternal (Mountain-like) Brahma, (composed of Avidyā, Karma, and various Śarīskāras) and enter first as Prāṇa (vital breath) within it in the form of Cidābhasa.

उपाधिप्रेतिद्धानई घटाकाणादयो यथा ।

उच्चनीचादिवस्तुनि भासयन्याफकर: सदा ॥ 5 ॥

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

न दृष्यति तर्वेवाईं दोवैलिंता कदापि न ।

मयि बुद्ध्यादिकर्तृलं मयस्येवावगे जना: ॥ 6 ॥

O Mountain! Unless I enter as Breath, how can this birth and death and leaving and retaking bodies after bodies be accounted for! As one great Ākāśa is denominated variously Ghaṭākāśa (Ākāśa in the air), Patākāśa (Ākāśa in cloth or picture), So I too appear variously by acknowledging this Prāṇa in various places due to Avidyā and various Antahkaranas. As the Sun's rays are never defiled when they illumine various objects on earth, so I, too, am not defiled in entering thus into various high and low Antahkaranas (heart).

वद्रति चात्मा कर्मति विमुईा न सुखुद्धयः ।

अज्ञानभेदततन्द्रनायाया भेदततसा ॥ 7 ॥

The ignorant people attach Buddhi and other things of activity on Me and say that Atman is the Doer; the intelligent people do not say that. I remain as the Witness in the hearts of all men, not as the Doer.

जीवेध्राविभागश्र कल्पितो माययेव तु ।

घटाकाशमहाकाशिविभागः कल्पितो यथा ॥ 8 ॥

तथैव कल्पितो भेदो जीवतपरामात्मनेः ।

यथा जीवबहुतं च माययैव न च स्वतः ॥ 9 ॥

तथेध्वहतुं च मायया न स्वभावतः ।

देहैन्द्रियदसंघातावसानोभदेपित्ता ॥ 1 0 ॥

O Acalendra! There are many Jivas and many Ísvaras due to the varieties in Avidyā and Vidyā. Really it is Māyā that differentiates into men, beasts and various other Jivas; and it is Māyā that differentiates into Brahmā, Viṣṇu and other Ísvaras. As the one pervading Sky (Ākāśa) is called Mahākāśa Ghatākāśa (being enclosed by jars), so the one All pervading Paramātmā is called Paramātmā, Jīvātmā (being enclosed within Jivas). As the Jivas are conceived many by Māyā, not in reality; so Ísvaras also are conceived many by Māyā; not in essence.

अधिदा जीभेद्यर हेतुनान्यः प्रकतीतः ।

गुणानं वासनाधेदेपिता या धराधर ॥ 1 1 ॥

माया सा परभेदस्य हेतुर्नान्यः कराचन ।

मयि सर्वमितं प्रोतमोते च धरणीधर ॥ 1 2 ॥

O Mountain! This Avidyā and nothing else, is the cause of the difference in Jivas, by creating differences in their bodies, indriyas (organs) and minds. Again, due to the varieties in the three Gunas and their wants (due to the differences between Sātvik, Rājasik and Tāmasik desires), Māyā also appears various. And their differences are the causes of different Īsvaras, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and others.

इंश्वरोड़ं च सूत्रात्या विराडात्माउहमासि च ।

ब्रह्माउंह विष्युक्री च गौरी ब्राही च वैषाणी ॥ 13 ॥

सूयोंड़े ताराकाशुहं तारकेशलाशप्रस्महूम् ।

पशुपक्षिस्वरूपाउं चाण्डालोड़ेचं च तस्कर: ॥ 14 ॥

O, Mountain! This whole world is interwoven in Me; It is I that am the Iśvara that resides in causal bodies; I am the ‘Sutrātman, Hīranyagarbha that resides in subtle bodies and it is I that am the Virāt, residing in the gross bodies. I am Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara; I am the Brāhmī, Vaiṣnavī and Raudrī Śaktis.

व्याधोर्ड कुतकर्मार्डे सत्यकर्मार्डे महाजनः ।

स्वीपुत्रपुस्तकाकारोच्छयेन न संशयः ॥ 15 ॥

यच्च किंचित्वस्तिव्रसु रूपयते श्रुवतरेपि वा ।

अंतर्वहिंष्रच तत्सर्वे व्याप्याहं सर्वदा स्थिता ॥ 16 ॥

I am the Sun, I am the Moon, I am the Stars; I am beasts, birds, Cāndālas and I am the Thief. I am the cruel hunter; I am the virtuous high-souled persons and I am the female, male, and hermaphrodite. There is no doubt in this. O Mountain! Wherever there is anything, seen or heard, I always exist there, within and without.

न तदिति मया त्रकं वसु किंचिच्चारावम् ।

यशिति चेतच्छूयं स्वादुक्याजुयोमयं हि तत ॥ 17 ॥

रज्जयांना सपीमताप्रवैरकता विभाति हि ।

तथैवेशादिरूपेण भाग्यहं नात्र संशयः ॥ 18 ॥

अधिष्ठानातिरेकेन कार्यलतं तत भासते ।

तस्मान्यस्तयैतैतस्तावज्ञान्यथा भवेत् ॥ 19 ॥

There is nothing moving or unmoving, that can

Book VII Chapter XXXIII

exist without Me. If there be such, that is like the son of a barren woman. Just as one rope is mistaken for a snake or a garland, so I am the One Brahma and appears as Ísvara, etc. There is no doubt in this. This world cannot appear without a substratum. And That Substratum is My Existence. There can be nothing else."

हिमालय उवाच

यथा बदसि देवेशि समध्यात्मवमुप्तिवदम् ।

तथेव उद्यमिच्छामि यदि देख कृपामपी ॥ 20 ॥

The Himalayas said: “O Devi! If Thou art merciful on me, I desire, then, to see Thy Virāt form in the Fourth Dimensional Space.

This sight is developed when the mind resides in the heart centre or in the centre of the eye-brows. A proper teacher is necessary."

यास उवाच

इति तस्य वचः शुत्वा सर्वे देवाः सविधावाः ।

नन्दुपूर्वितात्यानः पूजर्योक्ष तद्वचः ॥ 2 1 ॥

अथ देवमर्ते ज्ञावा भक्तकामदुपा शिवा ।

अर्शेशप्रिकर्न कर्य भक्तकामप्रपूर्णी ॥ 2 2 ॥

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of Girirāja, Viṣṇu and all the other Devas gladly seconded him. Then the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, knowing the desires of the Devas, showed Her Own Form, that fulfils the desires of the Bhaktas, that is auspicious and that is like the Kalpa Vṛksa towards the Bhaktas.

अप्यर्थसते महदोल्य विराङ्कपं परात्वरम् ।

ढीमैरनंक भवेदायर चन्द्रसूर्यैं च चक्छीपि । २३ ।।

दिगः श्रौत्रे वचो वेदा: प्राणो वायुः प्रक्रिलितः ।

विश्वं द्रव्यमिव्याहुः पृथिवी जयनं स्मृतः । २४ ।।

नभस्तलं नाधिसमो ज्योतिशक्रमुः स्थलम् ।

महलौकसुं ग्रीवा स्याजलोको मुखं स्मृतः || 25 ||

तपोकोको राहितैसुं सल्यलोकाद्धः स्थलः ।

इन्द्रवायो बाहल स्युः शब्धः श्रोगे महौशितुः ॥ 26 ॥

नास्तयद्वद्यों नासे स्ती गच्छो प्रायं स्त्यो कुँवे: ।

मुखमनिः: समाख्यातो दिवाराजी च पश्मणी ॥ 27 ॥

They saw Her Highest Virāt Form. The

Satyaloka is situated on the topmost part and is Her head; the Sun and Moon are Her eyes; the quarters, Her ears; the Vedas are Her words; the Universe is Her heart; the earth is Her loins; the Bhuvarloka is Her navel; the asterisms are Her Thighs; the Maharloka is Her neck; the Janarloka is Her Face; the Taparloka is Her head, situated below the Satyaloka; Indra and the Devas and the Svarloka is Her arms; the sound is the organ of Her ears; the Ásvin twins, her nose; the smell is the organ of smell; the fire is within Her face; day and night are like Her two wings.

ब्रह्मायांं पूर्विजूमपोत्यापस्तुः प्रवीर्तितः ।

रसो विन्हा समाखतात यमा दंदुः प्रवीर्तितः ॥ 28 ॥

दन्ता:स्नटकल यस्य हासो माया प्रक्रौतिता ।

सर्गस्वर्णमोगमोक्षः स्याद्वीडोध्योमहोर्जिणुः ॥ 29 ॥

लोभः: स्याद्यगीछोरस्या धर्मांगरनिंतु घुषभूः ।

प्रजापतिश्र मेई न्यादा: सद्य जानतिले ॥ 30 ॥

The four-faced Brahmā is Her eyebrows; water is Her palate; the juice thereof is Her organ of taste; Yama, the God of Death, is Her large teeth, the affection is Her small teeth; Māyā is Her smile; the creation of Universe is Her sidelooks; modesty is Her upper lip; covetousness is Her lower lip; unrighteousness is Her back.

कृषिकः समुद्रा गिरायोरस्थीन देव्या महौशितुः ।

नयो नाङ्गः समास्याला यूक्षा: केशः प्रकीर्तितः ॥ 31 ॥

The Prajāpati is Her organ of generation; the oceans are Her bowels; the mountains are Her bones; the rivers are Her veins; and the trees are the hairs of Her body.

कौमारवीरवनजरावोरस्या गतिन्तमा ।

बलाहकास्तु केशः स्युः संध्ये ते वाससी विषः ॥ 32 ॥

राजस्ध्रीजाद्वायाघोघ्रमातु मनः स्मूग्न ।

विज्ञानशक्तिशु हरी रोड़ो-त:करणं स्यून् ॥ 33 ॥

O King! Youth, virginity, and old age are Her best gaits, positions or ways (courses) paths, the clouds are Her handsome hairs; the two twilights are her clothings; the Moon is the mind of the Mother of the Universe; Hari is Her Vijñāna Śakti

Šrimaddevibhāgavatam

(the knowledge power); and Rudra is Her all destroying power.

अशादिजातयः सर्वा: अशिपिद्रेण सिद्धता विधभः ।

अतलादिमहालोका: कटयधोपागतां गता: ॥ 34 ॥

एतावुर्ग महाकपं द्वशुः सुरुपुंगावः ।

The horses and other animals are Her loins; the lower regions Atala, etc., are Her lower regions from Her hip to Her feet. The Devas began to behold Her this Cosmic (Virāt) appearance with eyes, wide awake, with wonder.

ज्वालमालासहसावाखी लेलिहानं च चिह्वा ॥ 35 ॥

दैंधुकटकटारावां वर्मतं वहामिश्रिभः ।

नानायुधधरं वीरं ब्रह्मश्रौदनं च यत् ॥ 36 ॥

सहस्रशीर्नयनं सहस्रचरणं तथा ।

कोदिसूर्प्रतीकाशं विद्युक्तोदिसम्प्रभम् ॥ 37 ॥

Thousands of fiery rays emitted from Her form; She began to lick the whole universe with Her lips; the two rows of teeth began to make horrible sounds; fires came out from Her eyes; various weapons were seen in Her hands; and the Brāhmaṇas and Kṣattriyas are become the food of that Awful Deity. Thousands of heads, eyes and feet were seen in that form. Crores of Suns, crores of lightnings flashes, mingled there. Horrible, Awful, That appearance looked terrific to the eyes, heart and mind.

भयंकंत महापोरं हद्धशोल्सासकराम।

द्वशुस्ते सुरा: सर्वे हाहाकारं च चिक्रे ॥ 38 ॥

विकंभपानहद्वा मूच्छंगिपुरुर्याया ।

स्मरणं च मत तेषां जगद्येवयमित्यपि ॥ 39 ॥

The Devas thus beheld and began to utter cries of horror and consternations; their hearts trembled and they were caught with immovable senselessness. “Here is the Devi, our Mother and Preserver.” this idea vanished away at once from their minds.

अथ ते ये सितया वेदाश्रतृदिंशु महाविधाः ।

बोध्यामासुर्युं मृछीलो मूढ्धितान्सुरान् ॥ 40 ॥

अत ते धैर्मालंब्य लब्या च श्रुतिनुभान् ।

प्रेमाशुपूर्णनयना रूढ़कण्डास्तु निजरोः ॥ 41 ॥

बायणब्रद्या वाचा स्तोतुं समुपचिक्रे ।

At this moment the Vedas that were on the four sides of the Devi, removed the swoon of the Devas and made them conscious. The Immortals got, the, the excellent Vedas; and, having patience, began to praise and chant hymns in words choked with feelings nad with tears of love flowing from their eyes.

देवा कचुः

अपराधं क्षमसाव्य पाष्ट्र दीनांस्वपुद्धवान् ॥ 42 ॥

कोपं संहर देवेशि सभया रूपदर्शन्ति ।

का ते सुर्ति: प्रकर्तेव्या पारमैर्निंसरिति ॥ 43 ॥

The Devas said: "O Mother! Forgive our faults. Protect us, the miserable, that are born of Thee. O Protectress of the Devas! Withhold Thy anger; we are very much terrified at the sight of Thy this form.

स्वस्याव्युझेन प्रशासी शावान्य श्वविक्रमः ।

तद्वारंजायमानां कवं स विषयो भवेत् ॥ 44 ॥

नमसे भुवनेशानि नमसे प्रणवासिकः ।

सर्वेविदानसरित्ये नमो ईंकारमूर्ते ॥ 45 ॥

O Devi! We are inferior immortals; what prayers can we offer to Thee! Thou Thyself canst not measure Thy powers; how then can we, who are born later, know of Thy greatness! Obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the Universe! Obeisance to Thee of the nature of the Pranava Om.

यस्मादिन: स्मुत्यजो यस्मात्यूर्थि चन्द्रमा: ।

यस्मादेषधयः सर्वित्तमे सर्वांतमेन नमः ॥ 46 ॥

यस्मादच देवा: संभृता: साध्या: पक्षिण एव च ।

पणवर्ध मनुष्याशु तस्मै सर्वांतमेन नमः ॥ 47 ॥

Thou art the One that is proved in all the Vedāntas. Obeisance to Thee, of the form of Hrim! Obeisance to Thee, the Self of all, whence has originated the Fire, the Sun, and the Moon and whence have sprung all the medicinal plants. Obeisance to the Devi, the Cosmic Deity, the Self in all whence have sprung all the Devas, Sādhyas, the beasts, birds, and men!

प्राणापानी जीहिवधी तपः अढ़ा मृन्त तथा ।

बहाचर्यं विधिध्रीव यस्मात्यमे नमो नमः ॥ 48 ॥

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

सत प्राणाधिईये यस्मासमिध्य: सत एव च ।

होभा: सत तथा लोकातत्से सर्वास्मिन नमः ॥ 49 ॥

We bow down again and again to the Great Form, Mahā Māyā, the Self of all, whence have sprung the vital breath Prāṇa, Apāna, grains and wheats, and Who is the source of asceticism, faith, truth, continence and the rules what to do and what not to do under the present circumstances. The seven Prāṇas, the seven Lokas, the seven Flames, the seven Samidhs, the seven Oblations to Fire, have sprung from Thee!

यस्तासमुद्रा गिरायः सिंधवः प्रदार्ति च ।

यस्तादोषधयः सर्वा रासतस्मी नमो नमः ॥ 50 ॥

Obeisance to Thee, the Great Self in all! Obeisance to the Universal form of the Deity of the Universe Whence have sprung all the oceans, all the mountains, all the rivers, all the medicinal plants and all the Rasas (the tastes of all things).

यस्ताङ्गः समुद्धाती दीक्षा यूयडु रदक्षिण।

ऋचो यज्ञिं सामानि तस्मै सर्वतंचन नः ॥ 51 ॥

नमः पुरस्तान्युते च नमस्ते पार्थ्योद्वीयः ।

अयं ऊर्धे चतुरिद्धु मातार्भयो नमो नमः ॥ 52 ॥

We bow down to that Virāt Form, the Great Self, the Mahā Māyā, whence have originated the sacrifice, the sacrificial post (to which the victim about to be immortalised is bound) and Dakṣinās (the sacrificial fees) and the Rk, the Yajus, and the Sāma Vedas. O Mother! O Mahā Māyā! We bow down to Thy front, to Thy back, to Thy both the sides, to Thy top, to Thy bottom and on all sides of Thee.

उपसंहर देवेशि रूपमेतदलौकिकम् ।

तदेव दर्शयामकं रूयं सुन्दरमुद्रम् ॥ 53 ॥

O Devi! Be kind enough of withhold this extraordinary Terrific Form of Thine, and shew us Thy Beautiful Lovely Form."

व्यास उवाच:

इति शीतानुसारानूद्धवा जगद्धवा कृषणपांच ।

संद्रल्य रूपं घोर तद्धर्णमास मुद्रम् ॥ ५४ ॥

पाणीकुणसारभीतिरयं सर्वागिकामेणम् ।

करणाणुर्णनयनं मन्द्रियमानुखांबुगम् ॥ 55 ॥

दृष्टा तत्सुदरं रूपं तदा भतीलिवर्षिताः ।

शातन्धिता: शंगमुने हर्षगद्धरिन:खना: ॥ 56 ॥

इति श्रीमद्वीभागवते महापुराणे सत्नमकल्मे देवौपीतायां

यश्विसंगोः। 11 33 11

Vyāsa said: O King! The World Mother, the Ocean of mercy, seeing the Devas terrified, withheld Her Fearful Cosmic Form and showed Her very beautiful appearance, pleasing to the whole world. Her body became soft and gentle. In one hand She held the noose, and in another She held the goad. The two other hands made signs to dispel all their fears and ready to grant the boons. Her eyes emitted rays of kindness; Her face was adorned with beautiful smiles. The Devas became glad at this and bowed down to Her in a peaceful mind and then spoke with great joy.

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Devi's Virat Rāpa in the Mahā Purānam, Śrimaddevibhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharṣi Veda Vyāsa.

Book VII Chapter XXXIV

